Angler’s Guide To
Tennessee Fish
Including Aquatic Nuisance Species

-- 1 of 80 --

Equal opportunity to participate in and benefit from programs of the Tennessee Wildlife Resources
Agency is available to all persons without regard to their race, color, national origin, sex, age, dis-
ability, or military service. TWRA is also an equal opportunity/equal access employer. Questions
should be directed to TWRA, Human Resources Office, P.O. Box 40747, Nashville, TN 37204, (615)
781-6594 (TDD 781-6691), or to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office for Human Resources,
4401 N. Fairfax Dr., Arlington, VA 22203.
Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency Authorization No. 328898, 65,000 copies,
February 2018. This public document was promulgated at a cost of $.38 per copy.
Published by the
Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency
Cover photograph
Paul Shaw
Graphics Designer/Layout
Raleigh Holtam
Edited by
Mike Bramlett and David Roddy
Thanks to the TWRA Fisheries personnel for their
review and contributions to this publication.
Special thanks to those that provided
pictures for use in this publication.
Partial funding of this publication was provided
by a grant from the United States Fish & Wildlife Service
through the Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force.

-- 2 of 80 --

Contents
Introduction ...............................................................................1
About Fish ..................................................................................2
Black Bass ...................................................................................4
Crappie ........................................................................................8
Sunfishes .................................................................................. 10
Temperate (True) Bass .......................................................... 16
Pike ............................................................................................ 19
Perch ......................................................................................... 20
Trout ......................................................................................... 23
Catfish....................................................................................... 25
Gar............................................................................................. 28
Buffalo ...................................................................................... 30
Redhorses................................................................................. 32
Carpsuckers ............................................................................. 33
Herring (Shad) ........................................................................ 34
Sturgeon ................................................................................... 36
Paddlefish ................................................................................. 38
Bowfin....................................................................................... 39
American Eel ........................................................................... 40
Freshwater Drum ................................................................... 40
Mooneye .................................................................................. 41
Golden Shiner ......................................................................... 41
Goldfish .................................................................................... 42
Brook Silverside ...................................................................... 42
Stoneroller ............................................................................... 43
Chestnut Lamprey ................................................................. 43
Atlantic Needlefish ................................................................ 44
Striped Mullet ......................................................................... 44
Tilapia ....................................................................................... 45
Other Tennessee Fish ........................................................... 46
Aquatic Nuisance Species..................................................... 48
Fish As Pets ............................................................................. 68
Aquatic Animals Prohibited In Tennessee........................ 71
Live Bait Regulations ............................................................. 71
Tennessee Angler Recognition Program ........................... 72
Further Reading ..................................................................... 73
TWRA Offices ........................................................................ 74

-- 3 of 80 --



-- 4 of 80 --

Introduction
Tennessee has one of the most diverse assemblages of fish in North America with
at least 320 species. Of these, approximately 285 species are considered native to
Tennessee. The non-native species found in Tennessee were either intentionally in-
troduced for food, bait, sport fishing, vegetation control, or accidently introduced by
an angler’s bait bucket release, boat and trailer, aquarium release, or movement from
surrounding states.
The waters of Tennessee offer opportunities for anglers of all ages, experience and
interests. With 29 major reservoirs, 19,000 miles of warm and cold water streams,
and thousands of smaller lakes and ponds, anglers in the Volunteer State have places
to wet a line year-round.
To help identify their catch, the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency (TWRA)
offers this convenient identification guide covering as many as 100 species or subspe-
cies, including aquatic nuisance species that are currently present in the state or may
be found in the future. Each species is depicted in a photograph with most having a
description of their preferred foods and habitat. It should be noted that listed state
record fish weights are for sportfishing methods and are subject to change. If an an-
gler catches a fish exceeding the weight listed, the angler should contact the TWRA
regional office in the area the fish was caught. The most updated version of this guide,
and the state record fish list is available at the TWRA’s website (tnwildlife.org).
Although some of the fish species on the following pages are very familiar (bass,
crappie and catfish), most anglers will not encounter the other species described. Only
12 percent of the 320 species of fish found in Tennessee are considered game fish, while
the remaining 88 percent are non-game fish. If help is needed in identifying fish you
encounter, contact one of the TWRA offices listed on page 74.
Throughout the guide, many of the species have “other name(s)” listed in addition to
the common name. These are names which have been given to the species by anglers
over time and are listed here only for historical information and to help bridge the
communication gap between fisheries biologists and anglers.
Before you head to the water to fish however, be sure to stop by the nearest TWRA
regional office or a license agent to buy a fishing license. Your fees go toward fisheries
management programs that help ensure your future recreational fishing opportuni-
ties. Request a free copy of the current Tennessee Fishing Guide when you purchase
your fishing license. You can also find the guide on the TWRA website.
Remember: If you fish on private property, you must obtain permission from the
owner. Whether that favorite fishing hole is on private or public land, be a respon-
sible resource user. Please do not leave trash along our waterways, including fishing
line. Do not dump unused bait in the water; instead, drain your bait bucket on land
or dispose of bait in the trash. Bait from bait dealers can contain invasive species.
Also report all littering violations and any suspected illegal dumping into Tennes-
see’s waters. After all, water is one of our most important resources as both humans
and fish depend on it for their survival. Following these simple rules will help ensure
that we all may enjoy our natural resources for generations to come.
1

-- 5 of 80 --

About Fish
Lateral line: Nerve endings along a row of sensory pores on either side of a fish
from the gills to tail act as “radar,” allowing the fish to detect the size, shape,
direction and speed of objects.
Touch: Fish can detect minute temperature differences and can discriminate be-
tween hard and soft baits. Fish are more likely to hold a soft bait longer.
Hearing: Water conducts sound better than air, and fish hear directly through the
bones in their head, therefore noise on the bank, dock or even in a boat may
spook fish.
Taste: Most fish do not rely on taste, but catfish and bullheads have taste buds over
their entire bodies and fins, including their barbels (whiskers), which help them
locate food.
Smell: Fish have nasal sacs (nares) to help detect odor. Night feeders, or fish that
live in muddy water, have a highly refined sense of smell.
Sight: Most fish lack eyelids and cannot adjust the diameter of the eye’s pupil.
Therefore they tend to avoid brightly lit areas. They can detect colors but their
perception of color is affected by water depth and clarity.
Fish are cold-blooded, which means that their body temperatures are about the
same as their surrounding environment. Because they don’t produce body heat, fish
must find and remain in preferred water temperatures.
A fish’s streamlined shape helps it move through the water. The water also helps
“float” fish; many species can make themselves lighter or heavier in the water by in-
creasing or decreasing the amount of gas in their swim bladder.
A fish swims by alternately contracting muscles along each side, which causes its
tail (caudal fin) to sweep and propel the fish forward. The pectoral and pelvic fins as-
sist with forward and backward movement, provide stability and steering, and help
the fish brake (stop).
Fish markings usually serve as camouflage. Fish that are found near rocks or
weeds often have blotches or bars on their sides. Many fish are dark on top and light
underneath, making them more inconspicuous when viewed from above or below.
Most fish have scales, which are embedded into the skin and are arranged in over-
lapping rows. Scales may be thick and tough, as in sunfish, or extremely small, as in
trout. Catfish, eels and paddlefish have a tough skin instead of scales. Growth marks
on scales, spines, and otoliths can reveal the age of a fish, just as tree rings show the
age of a tree.
The life span of most of our gamefish is about 4-10 years, but some live much
longer. Fish continue to grow in length and girth as they get older.
Many fish swim in groups or schools. Solitary fish may concentrate when a feed-
ing opportunity presents itself. Some fish wander constantly in search of food while
others have narrowly defined home ranges and wait for food to come close enough
to ambush.
2

-- 6 of 80 --

nares
(nostrils)
mouth
maxillary
(upper jaw) 	pectoral fin
pelvic fin
anal fin
vent
eye
operculum
(gill cover)
spiny dorsal fin 	soft dorsal fin
caudal (tail) fin	
lateral line
nares
(nostrils)
barbels
pectoral fin
pelvic fin
anal fin
vent
eye
operculum
(gill cover)
dorsal fin
adipose fin caudal (tail) fin	lateral line
Fish often make regular daily movements between feeding and resting places,
seasonal movements to summer and winter habitat and annual movements to tradi-
tional spawning areas. Many species travel long distances to spawn. Spawning activ-
ity concentrates some species of fish and makes them easier to find.
3

-- 7 of 80 --

David Roddy
Black Bass
The term, black bass, refers to several species of bass in Tennessee including
smallmouth, largemouth, spotted, redeye (Coosa) and the recently recognized Ala-
bama bass. Although several species of black bass may live together in the same
waters, they prefer somewhat different habitats. Smallmouth bass prefer the clearer,
cooler portions of the reservoirs or the swift runs of streams, while largemouth bass
prefer warmer, often more turbid parts of the reservoir with ample cover in the form
of brush, stumps and similar obstructions. Spotted bass are usually more associated
with the smallmouth bass and prefer rocky areas. The spotted bass and largemouth
bass are very similar, but there is one good way to tell them apart. Look at the fish’s
upper jaw (maxillary) when the mouth is closed. If the jaw extends behind the fish’s
eye, it is a largemouth bass (see page 6). If the jaw does not extend behind the eye,
you have one of the other black bass species. Interestingly, none of these black bass
are actually true bass. They are really members of the sunfish family, along with blue-
gill, crappie, and most other panfish species. Nevertheless, almost anytime anglers
mention bass or bass fishing they are most likely talking about these species.
Black bass hybrids can occur naturally or be produced in a hatchery. Hatcheries
experimented with a cross of the largemouth and smallmouth bass in years past and
this was the original “mean-mouth” bass. In the natural environment, largemouth
and smallmouth bass occupy different habitats and have different spawning times,
so natural hybrids of these two species rarely occur. However, the habitat use and
spawning times of smallmouth bass and spotted bass can overlap, and hybrids of
these two species, while still rare, do occur in Tennessee. While not the original
“mean-mouth,” the smallmouth/spotted bass hybrid has acquired this name over
time from anglers.
While most anglers may never encounter this hybrid, it is important to note that
an odd looking smallmouth or spotted bass may not necessarily mean it is a hybrid.
To avoid any potential size restriction issues, anglers should obey the smallmouth
bass size limit (the most restrictive) if they decide to harvest what they think is a
hybrid or “mean-mouth” bass.
Alabama Bass (Micropterus henshalli)
Other names: Alabama spotted bass, Alabama spot, spot
4

-- 8 of 80 --

Brian James
Until recently, the Alabama bass was considered a subspecies of the spotted bass
(Micropterus punctulatus), sometimes known as the Northern, or Kentucky spotted
bass, and was called the “Alabama spotted bass” (Micropterus punctulatus henshalli).
Based on the latest taxonomic research, the American Fisheries Society (AFS) in
2011 recognized the latter as a separate species, the Alabama bass. Based on that
research, the only way to tell the difference between the species is by genetic testing.
In Tennessee, the Alabama bass currently occurs in the southeastern part of the
state, within the Parksville Lake/Ocoee River watershed. It has also extended its
range westward towards the Tennessee River and Watts Bar Reservoir. While the
TWRA did not stock this species, it is believed they were illegally stocked by an-
glers into the previously-mentioned watershed since the Alabama spot was originally
found only in the Alabama/Mobile River system. As such, it is considered a non-
native species in Tennessee.
Although the habitat and behavior of both the Alabama bass and spotted bass are
very similar, (flowing water, clay-gravel bottoms, deeper water, and hanging out away
from the shoreline), the Alabama bass has a growth advantage over our native spotted
bass and commonly obtains weights over 4.5 pounds. The state record is 7 pounds.
Smallmouth Bass (Micropterus dolomieu)
Other names: bronzeback, smallie, brown bass, brownie
Smallmouth bass can be found in clear, rocky, fast-flowing streams with riffles,
pools, and large rocks. These streams should have gravel-rubble bottoms and water
temperature should not exceed 90 F in summer. They are also found in most large
reservoirs near ledges and rocky areas where the water is usually clear. Spawning
activity begins when water temperatures are 60-65 F, generally earlier than other
black bass.
They feed on a variety of fishes and invertebrates, such as sunfish, shad, shin-
ers, suckers, tadpoles and crayfish, as well as the nymphs of dragonflies, damselflies,
stoneflies, mayflies, and dobsonflies (hellgrammites).
Smallmouth bass are found mainly from Kentucky Reservoir eastward to the
lower slopes of the Great Smoky Mountains. They are abundant in some areas and
rare in others. The average smallmouth bass caught by anglers is 14-18 inches with
a range of 8-22 inches. Tennessee has the recognized world record at 11 pounds, 15
ounces. The smallmouth bass is the official state sport fish.
5

-- 9 of 80 --

Brian James
jaw extends behind eye
TWRA Staff
Largemouth Bass (Micropterus salmoides)
Other names: Northern largemouth, bigmouth bass, bucketmouth, green trout
Largemouth bass prefer calm, warmer waters in
rivers, lakes, reservoirs, and ponds, and are often
found near aquatic vegetation. They also prefer cov-
er, such as fallen trees, brush and stumps. They are
carnivores, eating insects, frogs, crayfish, minnows,
sunfish, and shad. They sometimes feed on land
animals such as mice and snakes. Spawning activity
begins when water temperatures approach 62-65 F.
Largemouth bass are found throughout the state
except in the highest elevations of East Tennessee. They are common to abundant in
most of their range. The average harvested size from reservoirs is approximately 15
inches with most between 8 and 24 inches in length. The state record is 15 pounds, 3
ounces, which was a Northern/Florida hybrid, and 12 years old.
Two subspecies of largemouth bass occur in Tennessee. In addition to the one
previously described, sometimes referred to as the “Northern” largemouth bass, the
Florida largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides floridanus) is also present in the
state. In an effort to increase the average size of largemouth bass in Tennessee and to
satisfy the angler’s desire for larger fish, the Florida strain has been stocked in Ten-
nessee waters for the past 20 years.
Research is ongoing to determine impacts and growth of Florida largemouth bass
stockings in Tennessee. Unfortunately, genetic testing must be conducted to deter-
mine if a largemouth bass is a Northern or Florida strain, as they are very similar in
appearance.
6

-- 10 of 80 --

Brian James
jaw does not extend
behind eye
Brian James
Spotted Bass (Micropterus punctulatus)
Other names: Kentucky bass, Kentucky spotted bass, spot, lineside,
Northern spotted bass
Spotted bass are found in large, cool, slower
streams and rivers. They are also found in most
larger reservoirs and their preferred habitat is quite
similar to smallmouth bass in that they show a pref-
erence for rocky areas.
Spotted bass feed on crayfish, shad, and aquatic
insects and are found throughout the state except
in the higher elevations in East Tennessee. They are
plentiful in parts of their range and scarce in others.
The harvest size from reservoirs averages approximately 13 inches and the range is
8-18 inches in length. The state record is 6 lbs., 1 oz.
Until recently, the spotted bass consisted of two subspecies, the spotted bass
(Micropterus punctulatus), sometimes known as the Northern or Kentucky spotted
bass, and the Alabama spotted bass (Micropterus punctulatus henshalli). The latest
taxonomic research (2011) recognizes the latter as a separate species, the Alabama
bass (Micropterus henshalli), also known as the “Alabama spot”. See species account
for Alabama bass on page 4.
7

-- 11 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
Crappie Spine Count:
White = 5-6
Black = 7-8
TWRA Staff
Redeye Bass (Micropterus coosae)
Other name: Coosa bass
Redeye bass are native to the Conasauga River system in extreme Southeast Ten-
nessee. Commonly called Coosa bass, this true redeye bass is quite different from the
rock bass which many people also call a “redeye.” Coosa bass have been stocked in
streams on the Cumberland Plateau and in some Highland Rim streams, where they
have established natural populations. In areas where they exist, they usually occupy
the smaller headwater streams during the summer months, but move downstream
during the colder seasons.
Redeye bass feed largely on terrestrial insects, but also consume crayfish, fish
eggs, salamanders and aquatic insects. These bass are found in isolated areas and are
uncommon in all but the eastern half of Tennessee. They seldom exceed 12 inches
in length and most are between 6-8 inches. The state record is 1 pound, 15 ounces.
Crappie
Both white and black crappie live in ponds, lakes, reservoirs and low-gradient
streams and rivers. They are found throughout Tennessee, except in higher elevation
in the East. They concentrate around brush, fallen trees and stumps, and feed on in-
sects, freshwater shrimp, amphipods
and small fish. Although both are
common in their Tennessee range,
white crappie is more abundant. To
help distinguish between the white
and black crappie, count the spines
(sharp and pointed) at the beginning
of the dorsal fin. White crappie have
5-6 spines and black crappie have 7-8
spines.
8

-- 12 of 80 --

Brian James
Blacknose
crappie
Eric Ganus
Eric Ganus
Black Crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus)
Other names: papermouth, stubnose, speckled perch, speck, calico bass, slab
Black crappie are found in quiet, warm waters, and are often as-
sociated with aquatic vegetation and sandy to muddy bottoms. They
have irregular, dark speckles on each side and seven or eight spines in the dorsal fin.
They are less common that white crappie, statewide.
In the spring, they eat more bottom-dwelling insects than white crappie. Larger
individuals feed on fish, also. In size, the normal range is 6-14 inches in length and
most harvested black crappie average around 11 inches in Tennessee. The state re-
cord is 4 pounds, 4 ounces.
The blacknose crappie is a black crappie that has a distinctive black stripe run-
ning from the top (dorsal) fin to the tip of the nose (see insert picture). It is a genetic
variation of black crappie and is not a hybrid or subspecies. They occur naturally in
West Tennessee, but have been stocked into several other waterbodies across the
state since the late 1980s.
White Crappie (Pomoxis annularis)
Other names: papermouth, speckled perch,
white perch, sac-a-lait, slab
White crappie are found in streams, lakes and slow-moving areas of large rivers.
They also thrive in small lakes and reservoirs. They are more tolerant of muddy wa-
ters than black crappie.
9

-- 13 of 80 --

Brian James
White crappie have distinctive dark vertical bars and have five or six spines in
the dorsal fin. White crappie males often become much darker during the spawning
season and at that time are often misidentified as black crappie.
White crappie feed on insects, freshwater shrimp, amphipods and small fish. They
are abundant in their range and the average length for white crappie is normally
6-14 inches, the same as that of black crappie. The state record for white crappie is 5
pounds, 1 ounce.
Sunfishes
This section contains “bluegill” or “panfish.” Sometimes called bream, they are of-
ten incorrectly referred to as perch. Also, many people refer to any small sunfish seen
or caught as a bluegill even though it actually may be a redear sunfish, green sunfish,
bluegill or other sunfish species. Other fish in the sunfish family (black basses and
crappie) were covered previously in this guide. All sunfish have similar food habits,
living chiefly on insects, crustaceans and small fish.
Bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus)
Other names: bream, brim,
sunfish, sunperch,
redbreasted bream,
coppernosed bream
Bluegill inhabit quiet, shallow, reasonably clean, warm lakes, ponds, and reser-
voirs as well as slow-flowing rivers and creeks containing aquatic vegetation with
sand, mud, or gravel bottoms. Bluegill can live in most waters but are uncommon in
trout streams. Insects are their principal food. Bluegill spawn in shallow water and
their beds are shallow depressions, usually grouped together. Bluegill spawn late into
summer.
Bluegill are found throughout Tennessee except in the higher elevations of the
eastern mountains. They are common throughout this range and are the most com-
mon sunfish in the state. The average length of bluegill harvested in Tennessee is 7
inches and the range is 4-11 inches. The state record is 3 pounds.
10

-- 14 of 80 --

Brian James
Mike Bramlett
Redear sunfish prefer warm, clear, non-flowing waters containing vegetation,
stumps, logs and other cover, and are common in farm ponds, lakes, and reservoirs.
Their main food items are aquatic snails (giving them the common name of “shell-
cracker”), midge larvae, amphipods, and mayfly, damselfly, and dragonfly nymphs.
Other foods are zooplankton, fish eggs, and crayfish. The feeding habits of redear
do not differ significantly from bluegill, except redear sunfish eat more snails. In ad-
dition, redear sunfish do not spawn more than once per year and usually spawn in
deeper water than bluegill.
Redear sunfish are common throughout Tennessee except in the higher elevations
of the eastern mountains. The average length of redear harvested in Tennessee is 8
inches, and the range is 4-12 inches. The state record is 3 pounds, 6 ounces.
Green Sunfish (Lepomis cyanellus)
Other names: green perch,
pond perch
Redear Sunfish
(Lepomis microlophus)
Other names: shellcracker,
stumpknocker,
chinquapin,
bream
Green sunfish will tolerate many habitats, but prefer warm, still waters. They in-
habit lakes, ponds and sluggish creeks and streams and are known to establish terri-
tory near the water’s edge under brush, rocks or exposed roots.
11

-- 15 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
Brian James
Green sunfish are agressive feeders and prefer dragonfly and mayfly nymphs, cad-
disfly larvae, midges, freshwater shrimp and beetles, and will occasionally eat small
fish like mosquitofish. Common throughout their range, they are found across the
state except in the higher elevations of East Tennessee. Their average length is 4
inches and the range is 2-8 inches in length. The state record is 1 pound, 4 ounces.
Green sunfish/bluegill hybrids are often sold as “hybrid bluegill.”
Warmouth (Lepomis gulosus)
Other names: warmouth bass,
goggle-eye, bream,
red-eyed bream,
stumpknocker
Warmouth inhabit relatively shallow, slow-flowing, mud bottom creeks, ponds,
lakes, swamps and reservoirs. They are often found hiding around weed beds, snags
and under the banks of streams and ponds, rather than in open water. Because of
their large mouths, warmouth have more variety in their diet than most sunfish.
They eat small fish, as well as invertebrates such as crayfish, snails and freshwater
shrimp. Dragonflies and other insects are also important food items.
Warmouth are found throughout the state except in the higher elevations of East
Tennessee. Warmouth range from uncommon in some locations to common in oth-
ers. Seven inches is the average length of warmouth harvested from Tennessee wa-
ters, and the range is 4-10 inches. The state record is 1 pound, 12 ounces.
Rock Bass (Ambloplites rupestris)
Other names: redeye,
black perch, goggle-eye,
rock sunfish
12

-- 16 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
Rock bass, sometimes called redeye bass, prefer small, cool streams or the shore-
line of larger streams with rocky, silt-free bottoms, clear water and extensive cover.
They are occasionally found in clear, rocky areas of reservoirs and often congregate
in deep pools near boulders, ledges, logs and other cover.
Major foods of the rock bass are crayfish, aquatic and land insects, small mollusks,
and small fishes. In Tennessee, rock bass are found in the cooler streams associated
with smallmouth bass or even trout. They are found between Kentucky Reservoir
and the higher elevations of East Tennessee. Rock bass average eight inches in length
when harvested in Tennessee and the range is 6-12 inches. The state record is 2
pounds, 8 ounces.
Redbreast Sunfish (Lepomis auritus)
Other names: redbreast bream, redbelly, yellowbelly sunfish, robin
Redbreast sunfish inhabit streams, rivers and lakes. In streams with rapids, they
move to deeper stretches with gravel or rocky bottoms and frequently concentrate
around boulders, limestone outcroppings, logs or aquatic vegetation.
The major food of the redbreast is aquatic insects, including caddisflies, dragon-
flies, beetles, midges and mayflies. They also eat land insects, snails, crayfish, small
fish, and occasionally organic matter from the stream bottom.
Redbreast may be found throughout the state except in higher elevations in East
Tennessee. They are more common in the eastern part of the state and are consid-
ered rare in West Tennessee. Redbreast sunfish are also more common in streams
than in reservoirs, ponds, or lakes. Nine inches is the average length of redbreast
sunfish kept by anglers in Tennessee with a range of 5-12 inches. The state record is
1 pound, 5 ounces.
13

-- 17 of 80 --

Brian James
Mark Thurman
Orangespotted Sunfish (Lepomis humilis)
Other names: redspotted sunfish, dwarf sunfish, sunperch
Orangespotted sunfish are found in quiet streams and vegetated lakes, ponds and
reservoirs. Insects constitute their major food source.
They are found primarily in the western half of Tennessee and are uncommon
even in that area. With a range of 1-4 inches, this sunfish averages 2 inches in length
and is one of the smallest of the sunfish family. The state record is 5 ounces.
Flier (Centrarchus macropterus)
Other names: round sunfish, goggle-eye, flier bream
The flier prefers sluggish lowland habitats with clear, heavily vegetated waters.
Its feeding habits are typical of sunfish and include zooplankton, midges, beetles,
worms, snails, clams and occasionally fish, fish eggs or fry.
The flier is found in West Tennessee, in streams that flow directly into the Missis-
sippi River and Reelfoot Lake. Although not common within this range, the average
length caught is 4 inches and the range is 3-6 inches. The state record is 8 ounces.
14

-- 18 of 80 --

Brian James
Rob Lindbom
Longear Sunfish (Lepomis megalotis)
Other names: bream,
sunperch, pumpkinseed
Although longear sunfish now thrive in reservoirs, they typically inhabit creeks,
small streams and rivers. They feed on immature aquatic insects, worms, crayfish,
small fish and fish eggs. Longear sunfish are found throughout Tennessee except in
the higher elevations of the eastern mountains. They are common throughout most
of their range in Tennessee and are one of the most colorful fish seen by anglers. Av-
eraging around 6 inches, adults normally range from 4-8 inches in length. The state
record is 13 ounces.
Pumpkinseed (Lepomis gibbosus)
Other names: sunperch, sunny
The pumpkinseed is an inhabitant of quiet, sluggish waters, and is occasionally
found in the northeastern part of Tennessee. It is one of the most uncommon sunfish
in the state. Pumpkinseed feed on zooplankton, midges, mayfly nymphs, snails and
insects. Their average length is four inches, and the range is 2-6 inches. The state
record is 5 ounces.
15

-- 19 of 80 --

Brian James
Brian James
Temperate (True) Bass
As their name implies, these fish are true bass, as opposed to the black bass, which
are actually members of the sunfish family. To help with identification between the
species, see page 18.
Striped Bass (Morone saxatilis)
Other names: rockfish,
striper, rock,
linesides
Striped bass were originally native to the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico,
where they entered fresh water only to spawn. In Tennessee, they are found only
where they have been stocked, or in places where they have migrated from stocked
waters. They occupy open water areas, usually in schools. Striped bass feed almost
exclusively on gizzard shad, threadfin shad, and other herrings.
In Tennessee waters where striped bass have been stocked, they can be consid-
ered common, but they can migrate to other reservoirs through the series of dam
locks. The average harvested size of striped bass from reservoirs is approximately 32
inches but the range is 15-40 inches. The state record is 65 pounds, 6 ounces.
White Bass (Morone chrysops)
Other names: stripe,
stripe bass, sand bass,
silver bass
White bass are found in open water schools, usually in clear, cool-water rivers and
reservoirs. They feed on fishes, mainly small shad and minnows. They normall “run”
upstream to spawn when water temperatures reach 50-55 F in the spring.
White bass are found throughout the state except in the higher elevations of East
Tennessee and are common to abundant over their range. The average size of white
bass harvested from reservoirs is approximately 12 inches and the range is 8-18 inch-
es in length. The state record is 5 pounds, 10 ounces.
16

-- 20 of 80 --

Brian James
Brian James
Yellow Bass(Morone mississippiensis)
Other names: brassy bass,
striped jack, stripe,
yellow belly,
barfish
Yellow bass are found in quiet pools and backwaters of large streams, lakes and
reservoirs. They prefer warmer waters than white bass and feed in open water on
small crustaceans, insects and small fish.
Yellow bass were originally found in the western part of the state, but more re-
cently have shown up in many reservoirs of the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers
where they are now moderately common to abundant. Harvested yellow bass aver-
age 7-10 inches and range from 4-11 inches in length. The state record is 2 pounds,
9 ounces.
Cherokee Bass (Morone saxatilis x M. chrysops)
Other names: hybrid striped bass, hybrid, wiper,
whiterock, hybrid rock,
sunshine bass
This species is a cross between the female striped bass and the male white bass.
Initially known as the “hybrid,” it was renamed the Cherokee bass because of the
first successful Tennessee introduction into Cherokee Reservoir in 1965. The Chero-
kee bass prefers habitat similar to that of the striped bass and is only found where
stocked or where it has migrated through dams to nearby reservoirs. They are known
for their superior fighting abilities.
The feeding habits of Cherokee bass are similar to striped bass and white bass in
that they herd schools of shad near the surface and can cause considerable surface
disturbance when feeding. They average approximately 18 inches in length and the
range is 8-30 inches. The state record is 23 pounds, 3 ounces.
17

-- 21 of 80 --

Temperate Bass Comparison Chart
TWRA Staff
18

-- 22 of 80 --

Brian James
Rob Lindbom
Pike
Two species of pike are commonly sought by anglers in Tennessee; the muskel-
lunge and the pickerel. The muskellunge occurs as two distinct strains. The first is
native to streams in the northern portion of the Cumberland Plateau. It has been
reintroduced to several other streams in middle and East Tennessee. The other strain
prefers the waters of lakes and reservoirs and has been stocked in several reservoirs.
Muskellunge (Esox masquinongy)
Other names: musky, muskie, jack pike
Both strains of musky found in Tennessee prefer cool clear water with aquatic
vegetation. They are rarely far from cover and often hang motionless near cover
awaiting their prey. Muskellunge feed primarily on fish, but they are also known to
prey on snakes or other terrestrial animals that might be available.
Tennessee muskellunge are found in tributaries of the Big South Fork of the
Cumberland River, and also the Emory River and its tributaries in the Tennessee
River system. They have also been reintroduced to several other reservoirs and river
systems, including the Upper Caney Fork River and its tributaries, and Collins and
Calfkiller rivers. They are also found in Melton Hill, Dale Hollow, and Parksville res-
ervoirs. Muskellunge averages about 32 inches in length at harvest and ranges from
20-45 inches. The state record is 43 pounds, 14 ounces.
Chain Pickerel (Esox niger)
Other names: pickerel, grass pike, chainsides
Chain pickerel survive in habitat that varies from clear, shallow, heavily vegetat-
ed shoal water to the deeper parts of lakes. They are most commonly found in the
backs of coves in Kentucky Reservoir and many West Tennessee streams. They prefer
brush and weed beds.
Chain pickerel feed on fish and other vertebrates, sometimes including mice, sala-
19

-- 23 of 80 --

Brian James
manders, frogs and tadpoles. They are found in the western third of Tennessee and
are generally uncommon. The average length of chain pickerel caught in Tennessee
is 20 inches and range from 12-28 inches. The state record is 7 pounds, 7 ounces.
The redfin pickerel (Esox americanus), sometimes called grass pickerel also oc-
curs in the western third of the state, where it inhabits sluggish waters from ponds
and swamps to pools in rivers and streams. Their diet is similar to the chain pickerel,
although they seldom exceed 15 inches in length.
Perch
Although the perch family is one of the largest families of fish in North America,
only three species are commonly sought by anglers because of their size and excel-
lent quality as table fare. The remaining species, approximately 100, include some of
the most beautiful fish in Tennessee; the darters.
Yellow Perch (Perca flavescens)
Other names: lake perch, raccoon perch, striped perch, redfin perch
The yellow perch is a very adaptable species that lives in a variety of habitats. It is
most common in clear, open water of large lakes, ponds, or quiet rivers with moder-
ate vegetation, and muck, sand, or gravel substrate. Their food consists of immature
insects, larger invertebrates and fishes, taken in open water or off the bottom.
In Tennessee, yellow perch can be found mainly in the larger mainstream res-
ervoirs of the Tennessee River in Southeast Tennessee, and in Kentucky Reservoir.
Although common in some of these areas, they are uncommon in most. Their range,
as well as their numbers, seems to be expanding in the state. Anglers have located
yellow perch in creeks near the back-end of reservoir embayments. Harvested yellow
perch average 8 inches in length and range from 4-14 inches. The state record is 2
pounds, 3 ounces.
20

-- 24 of 80 --

Brian James
Brian James
Sauger (Sander canadensis)
Other names: jack salmon, jack fish, sand pike, river pike
Sauger habitat is typically medium and large, free-flowing streams, rivers, and
reservoirs. They are more tolerant of turbid conditions than walleye. Fish are their
principal source of food.
Sauger are found in all mainstream reservoirs of the Tennessee and Cumberland
river systems, the Mississippi River and many larger tributary streams. Anglers usu-
ally locate sauger near dams or river islands. Unlike saugeye and walleye, the sauger
normally has distinct and separate black spots in the spiny dorsal fin.
The average length of sauger harvested is approximately 16 inches and the range
is 10-22 inches. The state record is 7 pounds, 6 ounces.
Walleye (Sander vitreum)
Other names: walleyed pike, jackfish, jack salmon, jack, pike perch, blue pike,
glass-eye
Walleye prefer large, clear, deep streams, rivers and reservoirs. They can survive
temperature extremes of 32-90 F, but usually prefer waters with a maximum tem-
perature around 77 F.
The walleye is a voracious feeder, primarily on other fish, including shad, sculpins,
suckers, sunfish, and shiners, which make up most of its diet.
Walleye are found in many Tennessee reservoirs with favorites being Center Hill,
Cherokee, Dale Hollow, Norris, South Holston, Tellico, Tims Ford, and Watauga.
Reservoirs recently stocked with walleye include Cheatham, Chickamauga, Ft. Pat-
rick Henry, Normandy, Old Hickory, and Watts Bar.
21

-- 25 of 80 --

Bart Carter
Bart Carter
To help distinguish between sauger and saugeye, the walleye has a black spot at
the rear base of the spiny dorsal fin and a clear white tip on the lower lobe of the
caudal fin.
The average length harvested is approximately 18 inches but the range is 14-28
inches. The state and world record is 25 pounds.
Saugeye (Sander canadensis x S. vitreum)
Saugeye are normally a hatchery-produced hybrid created by crossing a female
walleye with a male sauger, although natural crosses of the two species can occur in
waters where they are both present. While they will not attain the size of the walleye,
they seem to grow faster and reach harvestable size quicker.
Saugeye habitat preferences are closer to sauger than walleye, and they are more
tolerant of warm, muddy water than walleye, although all three normally spend most
of their time staying close to the bottom, depending on water clarity.
The feeding habits of saugeye are similar to their “parental” species, feeding on
benthic invertebrates and worms when young, and then transitioning to fish, such as
shad and shiners as adults.
Saugeye have been stocked for the past several years in Cherokee Reservoir, lo-
cated in the eastern part of Tennessee. The average saugeye harvested is approxi-
mately 18 inches, but the range is 15-21 inches. The current state record saugeye is
10 pounds, 12 ounces.
Saugeye look similar to both parental spe-
cies, but can best be identified by the “blotchy”
and somewhat subdued (versus distinct) saddle
markings on their sides and back. Also, the
spiny dorsal fin has black spots and bars (con-
nected and continuous) in at least the first half
of the fin (right).
22

-- 26 of 80 --

Brian James
Jim Habera
wild brook
trout
Brian James
hatchery-raised brook trout
Trout
Although four species of trout are found in Tennessee, only one, the brook trout,
is native to the state. Trout are usually associated with streams of the eastern moun-
tains, but there are many instances where tailwaters, small rivers and spring-fed
streams in other portions of Tennessee have temperatures that support these cold-
water fish year-round. The TWRA has established a winter trout stocking program
in select, publicly accessible ponds and small lakes across the state that provides a
quality fishing experience for anglers seeking this opportunity. Visit the TWRA web-
site for more information about this program, and all other trout stocking locations.
Brook Trout (Salvelinus fontinalis)
Other names: brookie, speckled trout, mountain trout, specks, charr
Brook trout are found mostly
in clear, cold, headwater streams
at 	elevations 	generally 	above
3,000 feet in the mountains of East
Tennessee. The water temperature of
brook trout habitat rarely exceeds 68 F. They are the only trout native to Tennessee
and fish from the southern Appalachians have been found to be genetically distinct
from brook trout native to more northern parts of this species’ range.
They feed extensively on aquatic and land insects, snails, fish eggs, frogs, sala-
manders, small fishes, and crustaceans. They are common in the upper parts of
many high mountain streams, fading to rare in the lower sections of these streams. A
hatchery-produced variety is also stocked in some cold tailwaters.
Harvested length of Tennessee brook trout ranges between 5-12 inches. The state
record is 4 pounds, 12 ounces.
Brown Trout (Salmo trutta)
Other name: brown
Brown trout are not native to the state, but have been introduced in many suitable
places. They can be found in coldwater streams and rivers at elevations generally
23

-- 27 of 80 --

Brian James
John Hammonds
below 3,000 feet, as well as tailraces and reservoirs where water temperatures stay
below 70 F. Although their habitat is similar to that of the brook or rainbow trout,
brown trout can live in water with slightly higher temperatures.
Brown trout favor mayflies and other aquatic insects but will feed on worms,
snails, frogs, insects, crawfish, salamanders and smaller fish.
They are most common in areas where they are maintained by stocking. The aver-
age length harvested in our state is around 12 inches and the range is 8-24 inches.
The state record is 28 pounds, 12 ounces.
Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
Other names: rainbow,
redside
Rainbow trout are not native to Tennessee, but they have been stocked extensively
in the state, particularly in the East. They are usually found where water tempera-
tures stay below 70 F. This includes many mountain streams in East Tennesse above
elevations of 1,800 feet, as well as spring-fed streams, reservoirs, and tailwaters else-
where that provide suitable coldwater habitat.
Rainbow trout eat insects, crayfish, fish, and fish eggs. The average harvested
length is approximately 9 inches, with a range of 6-20 inches. The state record is 18
pounds, 8 ounces.
Lake Trout (Salvelinus namaycush)
Other names: gray trout, laker
Lake trout are the third non-native trout species found in Tennessee, and are
stocked in South Holston and Watauga reservoirs in the eastern part of the state.
They are usually found in the deeper and colder depths of these reservoirs.
The diet of lake trout varies with the age and size of the fish, but mainly consists
of aquatic insects, snails, and fish. Lake trout caught by anglers in Tennessee usually
range from about 3-10 pounds. The state record is 22 pounds, 2 ounces.
24

-- 28 of 80 --

Brian James
Eric Ganus
Catfish
Although approximately 21 native species of catfish exist in Tennessee, only six
species are commonly caught by anglers. These species are divided into two groups:
the true catfish and a group popularly called bullheads. The practical difference is
that bullheads are somewhat smaller and have a tendency to live in smaller and pos-
sibly muddier waters.
Channel Catfish (Ictalurus punctatus)
Other names: channels, fiddler, willow cat,
spotted catfish, speckled catfish,
forked-tail cat
Channel catfish are characteristic of clear, medium to large rivers, reservoirs, and
ponds. They will eat almost anything, preferring insects, worms, fish eggs, crayfish, a
variety of plants, and fish (usually dead). Younger fish usually have dark spots along
the sides of the body, (see above), hence the other names of spotted or speckled
catfish.
Channel catfish are common and found throughout the state except in trout
streams in higher elevations of East Tennessee. The average length harvested from
reservoirs is approximately 16 inches and the range is 10-38 inches. The state record
is 41 pounds, and the channel catfish is the official state commercial fish.
Blue Catfish (Ictalurus furcatus)
Other names: white cat, blue channel, Mississippi cat, Fulton cat
25

-- 29 of 80 --

Brian James
TWRA Staff
Blue catfish, the most common catfish harvested by anglers, are found in major
rivers and reservoirs, but are also characteristic of deep areas of large rivers through-
out their range. Look for them in chutes and pools with currents.
The food of the blue catfish includes fish, crayfish, aquatic insects and many other
animals it encounters. Found throughout Tennessee in reservoirs and larger rivers,
this catfish is common and also reaches the largest size among its relatives. Approxi-
mately 18 inches is the average length harvested from reservoirs, with a range of 14-
45 inches. The state record is 112 pounds.
Flathead Catfish (Pylodictis olivaris)
Other names: shovelnose cat, yellow cat, mud cat, shovelhead cat, Appaloosa cat,
bluff cat
Flathead catfish live in major rivers and reservoirs, and prefer deep holes scoured
by currents, such as those in eddies adjacent to bridge pilings and in tailraces below
dams. They feed mainly on live fish, taking whatever is most available. Food includes
gizzard shad, freshwater drum, carp, channel catfish, bullheads, bluegill, and occa-
sionally crayfish.
Flathead catfish are found throughout Tennessee except in the higher elevations
of the eastern mountains. They are common, and those harvested average 18 inches
with a range of 12-40 inches in length. The state record is 85 pounds, 15 ounces.
Yellow Bullhead (Ameiurus natalis)
Other names: mud cat, pollywog, yellow belly
Yellow bullheads inhabit small shallow lakes, ponds, reservoirs and slow-moving
streams with various bottom types from muck to gravel. They are less tolerant of
poor water conditions than other bullheads.
Yellow bullhead feed on a wide variety of small, live and dead fish. They will also
eat dragonfly nymphs, crayfish, mollusks and fragments of aquatic plants. They are
common throughout Tennessee except in the higher elevations of the eastern moun-
tains. The average length for yellow bullhead harvested in Tennessee is approximate-
ly 10 inches with a range of 4-16 inches. The state record is 4 pounds, 8 ounces.
26

-- 30 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
TWRA Staff
Brown Bullhead (Ameiurus nebulosus)
Other names: mud cat, pollywog, brown catfish, speckled bullhead
Brown bullheads usually inhabit still or slowly-flowing warm waters such as
ponds, lakes and sluggish streams and reservoirs. They are tolerant of poor water
conditions including siltation and pollution. Brown bullhead feed on mollusks, in-
sects, leeches, sunfish, crustaceans, worms, algae, plant material, fish (usually dead),
and fish eggs.
Found throughout Tennessee, except in the high elevations of the eastern moun-
tains, this bullhead is less common. Average length harvested is 8 inches and the
range is 4-14 inches. The state record is 3 pounds, 15 ounces.
Black Bullhead (Ameiurus melas)
Other names: mud cat, pollywog
Black bullhead are found in ponds and lower sections of small to medium-sized
streams with little slope. Black bullhead also inhabit pools and backwaters of larger
streams and rivers and silty, soft-bottomed areas of lakes and reservoirs.
They feed on immature insects, clams, snails, crustaceans, plant material, leeches
and fish (usually dead), such as shiners and sunfish. Black bullhead are common and
found throughout the state except in the higher elevations of the eastern mountains.
Eight inches is the average harvested length, with a range of 4-14 inches. The state
record is 3 pounds, 6 ounces.
27

-- 31 of 80 --

Brian James
TWRA Staff
Gar
Gar frequent quiet, often weedy waters where food is abundant. Gars eat fish such
as minnows and small sunfish. They also have the ability to “gulp” air directly into an
air bladder which allows them to “breathe”, and in turn, survive in waters with very
little dissolved oxygen. Gar are edible, but are not considered a food fish. The eggs of
all gar are reported to be poisonous to vertebrate animals, including humans.
Longnose Gar (Lepisosteus osseus)
Other name: needlenose gar
Longnose gar are found in larger streams and reservoirs, where they prefer the
warmest waters. Adult gar feed on fish such as shiners, sunfish, shad, catfish, carp
and bullheads, as well as any other available food that their throats will accommo-
date. They show a preference for minnows and other small fish that lack spiny fins.
Longnose gar are found throughout the state except in the higher elevations of
East Tennessee. They are common throughout this range. The average longnose re-
corded in Tennessee is around 20 inches, but the range is 12-36 inches. The state
record is 38 pounds, 3 ounces.
Shortnose Gar (Lepisosteus platostomus)
Other names: short-bill gar, stub-nose gar
Shortnose gar are typically found in quiet, backwater areas of rivers, reservoirs,
and in lakes and oxbows. They are more tolerant of muddy water than other gar and
prefer warm water. This gar feeds on crayfish, fish and aquatic insects.
They are common in the western portion of the state, gradually declining in abun-
dance toward the eastern part of Tennessee, where they are rare. Tennessee short-
nose gar average around 18 inches and range from 12-30 inches in length. The state
record is 7 pounds, 3 ounces.
28

-- 32 of 80 --

Brian James
dorsal view of head
Brian James
Brian James
Spotted Gar (Lepisosteus oculatus)
Other name: leopard gar
Spotted gar are most abundant in quiet, clear water with abundant aquatic vegeta-
tion. They prefer warmer waters than other gar, and also feed on fish.
In Tennessee, spotted gar are found mostly in the larger reservoirs and rivers.
They are more common in the western portion of the state, becoming uncommon
in eastern waters. Average length is 18 inches with a range of 12-26 inches. The state
record is 10 pounds, 10 ounces.
Alligator Gar (Atractosteus spatula)
Other name: gator gar
The alligator gar is the largest of the four spe-
cies found in Tennessee, and one of the largest
freshwater fishes. They inhabit sluggish pools
and backwaters of large rivers and oxbow lakes
in the western portion of the state. Their diet is
mainly fish, but they will eat any potential food
item of appropriate size, including reptiles, am-
phibians, birds, and small mammals.
Alligator gar have declined drastically in abundance over the past fifty years and
the decline has been attributed to habitat loss. Accordingly, there has been an on-
going stocking program since 1999 to restore this gar in West Tennessee. For now,
alligator gar are protected in the state and if one is caught, it must be released imme-
diately. However, anglers are encouraged to report alligator gar catches to the nearest
TWRA regional office, as this will assist the Agency in monitoring the restoration
effort.
Where harvest is allowed in other states, anglers report alligator gar ranging from
4-6 feet and weighing 40-150 pounds.
29

-- 33 of 80 --

Brian James
Eric Ganus
Buffalo
Buffalo are members of the sucker family and all prefer the same general type of
habitat – large rivers and reservoirs. They are primarily a commercial species and
because of their feeding habits, are only occasionally caught by sport anglers. It can
be very difficult to differentiate the three species of buffalo at large sizes.
Bigmouth Buffalo (Ictiobus cyprinellus)
Other names: gourdhead, common buffalo, buffalo fish
Bigmouth buffalo inhabit the shallow portions of large rivers, oxbows, lakes, and
reservoirs. Even though they prefer clear water, they can tolerate muddy water and
are well adapted to reservoirs. Bigmouth buffalo eat plankton as well as bottom or-
ganisms, including insects, mollusks, algae, many microscopic organisms and plant
material.
Bigmouth buffalo are found throughout the western half of Tennessee in larger
bodies of water and in the mainstream reservoirs as far east as Knoxville. Although
these are seldom seen by sport anglers, they are common throughout their range.
Harvested bigmouth buffalo average approximately 24 inches in length, and the
range is 16-38 inches. The state record is 62 pounds.
Smallmouth Buffalo (Ictiobus bubalus)
Other names: razor-back buffalo, hump-backed buffalo, high-back buffalo
30

-- 34 of 80 --

Eric Ganus
Smallmouth buffalo prefer the clear waters of larger rivers and reservoirs. They
eat both animal and vegetative matter, and their main animal foods are aquatic lar-
vae and sometimes microscopic forms strained from the mud. Vegetative matter in-
cludes algae and small plants.
Smallmouth buffalo are common throughout most of Tennessee in larger rivers
and reservoirs. The average length of smallmouth buffalo harvested in Tennessee is
22 inches with a range of 14-34 inches. The state record is 62 pounds, 7 ounces.
Black Buffalo (Ictiobus niger)
Other names: mongrel buffalo,
blue rooter, round buffalo
Black buffalo are similar to bigmouth and smallmouth buffalo, but since they pre-
fer running water they are often found in strong currents of large rivers. Although
more of a vegetarian than other buffalo, black buffalo also eat plankton, insect larvae,
snails, and other small mollusks.
The range of black buffalo in Tennessee is similar to that of the bigmouth buffalo.
Harvested black buffalo average 24 inches and range between 16-40 inches in length.
The state record is 58 pounds.
31

-- 35 of 80 --

Brian James
Redhorses
Redhorses are a group of large suckers that so closely resemble one another that
only an expert can tell the various species apart. Other redhorses not pictured or
described here include the black, river, silver, and smallmouth. Generally, they are
found throughout the state except in high mountain trout waters, and feed on plank-
ton, bivalve mollusks, insect larvae like mayflies, caddisflies and midges, and fish
eggs.
Golden Redhorse (Moxostoma erythrurum)
Other names: yellow sucker, golden sucker
The golden redhorse inhabits riffle areas and pools of small to large, clear streams
and rivers, where riffles are composed of sand, gravel, boulders, and bedrock, and
the pools are free from heavy silt and aquatic vegetation. It is also found in lakes and
reservoirs, but is better adapted to river than lake habitats.
Food for the golden redhorse consists of animals and algae sucked up from bot-
tom sediments, including immature insects, worms, mollusks, chironomids, may-
flies, caddisflies, oligochaetes, and fingernail clams. They are found throughout Ten-
nessee, except the higher elevations of the eastern mountains and the Mississippi
River and its direct tributaries. It is often common in its range. The state average
for golden redhorse is 14 inches, with a range of 10-20 inches. The state record is 2
pounds, 15.5 ounces.
32

-- 36 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
quillback
carpsucker
Eric Ganus
Carpsuckers
In addition to the river carpsucker, there are two other closely related species
found in Tennessee. These are the highfin carpsucker and the quillback carpsucker.
All inhabit similar waters with the latter two being more typical of reservoirs. All are
tolerant of warm and muddy water and are bottom feeders with similar diets. As with
buffalo, carpsuckers are only occasionally caught by sport anglers.
River Carpsucker (Carpiodes carpio)
Other names: white carp, lake carp, quillback
The river carpsucker prefers Tennessee’s larger river systems and reservoirs, but
may also be found in more moderately sized rivers, except those in the extreme east-
ern portion of the state. The river carpsucker’s diet consists of food found on the
bottom, such as insects, algae, and plant material.
River carpsuckers are generally common where they occur, averaging approxi-
mately 14 inches in length and ranging from 10-20 inches. The state record is 1
pound, 9 ounces. For the quillback carpsucker, the state record is 6 pounds.
33

-- 37 of 80 --

Brian James
filament
Brian James
filament
Herring (Shad)
There are five members of the herring family (usually referred to as clupeids or
shad) found in Tennessee. All of the herrings are generally thought of as forage spe-
cies, although the skipjack is actually a predator for much of its life. In addition to
the three species described here, two other herring species are considered aquatic
nuisance species and are discussed beginning on page 48.
Also, to help distinguish young of the year gizzard and threadfin shad, which are
used for bait, from the invasive Asian carp (pages 51-52), note that our native gizzard
and threadfin shad have a “filament” at the end of the dorsal fin. Asian carp do not.
Gizzard Shad (Dorosoma cepedianum)
Other names: shad, gizzards, hickory shad, herring
Gizzard shad occur in schools and prefer productive, calm, warm waters, al-
though they can also be found in rivers, streams, and tailraces where currents are
strong. Their habitat also includes natural lakes, ponds, pools and backwaters of low
gradient streams.
They feed almost entirely on microscopic organisms which are strained from wa-
ter or silt. Gizzard shad will also pick through mud and organic matter on the bot-
tom for small food. They are widely distributed in Tennessee and are abundant in all
large streams and lakes. Although they are seldom caught by hook and line, gizzard
shad average approximately 8 inches in length and the range is 2-14 inches. The state
record is 3 pounds, 3 ounces.
Threadfin Shad (Dorosoma petenense)
Other names: shad, yellowtails, yellowfin
34

-- 38 of 80 --

Brian James
Threadfin shad live in lakes, larger rivers, and reservoirs. While this fish may not
be native to any portion of Tennessee, it has been widely introduced into reservoirs,
and lakes as a forage species.
Threadfin shad feed on plankton and are common in all major rivers and reser-
voirs. They range in size from 1-6 inches.
Skipjack Herring (Alosa chrysochloris)
Other names: skipjack, river herring, hickory shad, Tennessee tarpon
Skipjack herring prefer large rivers with clear, cool, flowing water. They are also
common in large mainstream reservoirs where they can be found in the fast-flowing
waters below dams. They feed primarily on fish, insects, and plankton, and often in
schools, when they force groups of small shad to the surface.
Skipjack herring are found mostly in Tennessee’s mainstream reservoirs and their
larger tributary rivers. They are common in this habitat from Knoxville westward,
excluding the Cumberland Plateau. They average approximately 12 inches in length
and the range is 9-20 inches. The state and world record is 4 pounds, 3 ounces.
35

-- 39 of 80 --

Brian James
juvenile lake sturgeon
Brian James
Sturgeon
Sturgeons are a group of primitive fish that have several rows of bony plates (called
scutes) on their bodies instead of the typical covering of scales. They also have four
barbels (whiskers) in front of their sucker-like mouth on the underside of their ros-
trum (snout). These are used to sense the river bottom and to identify food items.
This group of fish contains some of the largest freshwater fish and historically were
an important Tennessee commercial species. Of seven sturgeon species that occur
in North America, three are found in Tennessee, none of which may be harvested.
Lake Sturgeon (Acipenser fulvescens)
An inhabitant of large rivers and lakes, the lake sturgeon is one of three native
sturgeon species found in Tennessee. While they were formerly found in the Cum-
berland, Mississippi, and Tennessee rivers, lake sturgeon populations have dramati-
cally declined and are listed as endangered in Tennessee. The reasons for the decline
over the last century are a combina-
tion of over-fishing, habitat loss, and
the damming of rivers.
Being a bottom feeder, their diet
consists mainly of snails, insect lar-
vae, mollusks and crayfish. Poten-
tially one of the largest and longest
living fish in Tennessee, the lake stur-
geon is reported to grow to eight feet
in length, weigh up to 300 pounds,
and live 150 years.
Efforts have been underway to restore reproducing populations of this primi-
tive species to Tennessee waters. Since 2000, over 220,000 lake sturgeon have been
stocked into the Cumberland River and the upper portion of the Tennessee River.
Although lake sturgeon must be released if caught, TWRA encourages anglers to
report pertinent information, such as time and location of capture, and the length
of the lake sturgeon by calling the Fisheries Division at 615-781-6575. Information
may also be emailed to sturgeon.reports@tn.gov. This data will provide important
movement and growth information needed to monitor the success of Tennessee’s
lake sturgeon reintroduction program. In appreciation for reporting this informa-
tion, anglers will receive a Lake Sturgeon Certificate. Anglers may also call the near-
est TWRA regional office to make a report (see page 74).
36

-- 40 of 80 --

David Ostendorf
David Ostendorf
Shovelnose Sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus platorynchus)
Other name: hackleback
Although the most common sturgeon in Tennessee, the shovelnose sturgeon is
found mainly in the Mississippi River in areas of moderate to strong current. Like
the other two native sturgeons, the shovelnose feeds entirely on the bottom, with
aquatic insect larvae being their primary food. Unlike the lake and pallid sturgeons,
the shovelnose is a “small” sturgeon, seldom exceeding a length of 30 inches or a
weight of 6 pounds.
Until 2010, this sturgeon was harvested by commercial fishers for its roe (eggs) in
the production of caviar. Shovelnose sturgeon are now a protected species because
of their similar appearance to Tennessee’s third sturgeon species, the pallid sturgeon,
which is listed as an endangered species.
Pallid Sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus albus)
Other name: white hackleback
The pallid sturgeon is an endangered species which cannot be harvested, and is
very similar in appearance to the shovelnose sturgeon. It is found in the Mississippi
River in areas with strong current and, like the previous two sturgeons, it is a bot-
tom-dwelling fish preferring a firm, sandy or gravel substrate.
The pallid sturgeon is one of the rarest and largest fishes in Tennessee and altera-
tions of large river systems such as damming, channelization and diking is believed
to be the primary cause of their decline.
Pallid sturgeon feed on aquatic insects and small fish, and attain a larger size than
shovelnose sturgeon, reaching lengths of over 6 feet and weighing over 70 pounds
with a lifespan of over 50 years. Hybrids between the pallid and shovelnose sturgeon
occur in the wild, complicating identification between the two species.
37

-- 41 of 80 --

Brian James
dorsal view of
rostrum (paddle)	Brian James
Paddlefish
(Polyodon spathula)
Other names: spoonbill, spoonbill cat, shovelnose cat, boneless cat
Paddlefish prefer large, free-flowing rivers rich in zooplankton. However, paddle-
fish are commonly found in reservoirs where they have adapted but occasionally
experience unsuitable spawning habitat needed to maintain harvestable populations.
They feed primarily on plankton strained from the water and occasionally on very
small fish inadvertently strained during feeding.
Paddlefish are usually found in the mainstream reservoirs of the Cumberland,
Tennessee, and Mississippi river systems, although populations exist in a few tribu-
tary reservoirs of the state. They are common to uncommon over this range. Tennes-
see paddlefish average 36 inches in length and the range is 24-60 inches. The state
record is 104 pounds. Paddlefish are commercially harvested for their roe (eggs),
which is used in caviar production.
38

-- 42 of 80 --

Brian James
Bowfin
(Amia calva)
Other names: grinnel, dogfish, grindle, mud fish, cypress trout
The bowfin is a quiet-water resident found in sluggish, swampy, clear, vegetated
bays of warm lakes and rivers. Bowfin can live in hot, poorly oxygenated waters that
are uninhabitable to many fish because they are able to take oxygen directly into an
air bladder, a process similar to breathing.
Bowfin are voracious predators that favor fish but will consume virtually any type
of animal, such as fish, crayfish, freshwater shrimp, frogs, and larger insects like wa-
ter beetles and dragonfly nymphs. They have numerous small teeth in their mouth
and a bony plate under the throat, between the jaws.
Bowfin habitat includes waters of the Tennessee River from Chattanooga down-
stream, the Cumberland River from Nashville downstream, and the Mississippi Riv-
er and its direct tributaries. They are common in the western part of their range,
becoming rare in the eastern portion of the state.
Average length caught is about 20 inches, with a range of 16-34 inches. They av-
erage 2-5 pounds and can reach 15 pounds. They are strong fighters when hooked,
but are usually taken by anglers fishing for other fish species. The state record is 15
pounds, 7 ounces.
This species looks similar to the snakehead, an aquatic nuisance species that has
the potential to invade Tennessee (see page 57).
39

-- 43 of 80 --

Eric Ganus
TWRA Staff
fin
American Eel
(Anguilla rostrata)
Other name: eel
Freshwater Drum
(Aplodinotus grunniens)
Other names: sheepshead, white perch, croaker, rosie, gaspergou, grunting perch
The American eel is shaped like a snake,
with a slick, smooth surface, but it has pectoral fins.
It can be found in the Cumberland, Mississippi, and Tennes-
see River drainages of the state, especially where movement is not impeded
by dams. Eels are uncommon in Tennessee and are only caught while fishing for other
fish species. When caught on hook and line, they are strong fighters. There is currently
an effort to spawn, raise and release eel back into Tennessee waters.
American eels are mostly nocturnal, hiding by day in deeper water beneath rocks
and other submerged cover. They feed on animal matter such as fish, crayfish, and
insects. Adults are commonly 15-35 inches in length, and weigh between 0.5-4.5
pounds. The state record is 5 pounds, 12 ounces.
Drum prefer large impoundments and rivers, but occur in a wide variety of habi-
tats. They are mainly bottom feeders, eating insect larvae, crustaceans, small fish,
clams, and snails.
Drum are found throughout the state, excluding trout streams in East Tennessee,
and are common. They are generally caught when fishing for other species. The aver-
age harvested length is 10 inches, with a range of 8-30 inches. Tennessee holds the
world record freshwater drum at 54 pounds, 8 ounces.
40

-- 44 of 80 --

Brian James
David Roddy
Mooneye
(Hiodon tergisus)
Other names: shad, toothed herring
Golden Shiner
(Notemigonus crysoleucas)
Other names: Baltimore minnow,
minnow, roach
Although the mooneye, and the closely related goldeye are similar in appearance to
shad and herrings (without the dorsal filament), these two species belong to a different
family of fish. Another characteristic used to separate these two species from the shad
or herrings is that both the mooneye and goldeye have teeth on their tongue, jaws, and
the roof of the mouth.
Mooneyes, as well as goldeyes, are surface feeders that inhabit mainly open water
areas of reservoirs and large rivers, and are commonly found in current. The moon-
eye is more widely distributed statewide than the goldeye, which is found mainly in
the western half of Tennessee.
They can be caught on light tackle, but are seldom sought by anglers because of
their soft and bony flesh. Adult mooneyes range from 12-16 inches. The state record
is 1 pound, 4 ounces. The state record for the goldeye is 14 ounces.
The golden shiner is a lake species preferring clean, clear, quiet, shallow, vegetated
areas of lakes, reservoirs, and sluggish stretches of rivers and streams. It eats algae,
water fleas, and other plankton organisms, chironomid pupae, aquatic insect larvae,
dragonfly nymphs, flying insects, midges, mollusks, and occasionally small fish.
The golden shiner is found throughout Tennessee and is common to abundant. It
averages approximately 5 inches in length and ranges between 3-8 inches. The state
record is 1 pound, .05 ounces.
41

-- 45 of 80 --

Brian James
TWRA Staff
snout of a
brook silverside
David Roddy
Goldfish
(Carassius auratus)
Other names: carp,
Baltimore minnow
Brook Silverside
(Labidesthes sicculus)
Other names: silverside, pin minnow
Goldfish are not native to Tennessee, and have become established by way of bait
bucket releases, hatcheries, and home aquarium releases. While not common state-
wide, an occasional one may be caught almost anywhere statewide, in ponds, pools,
backwaters, and reservoirs.
Goldfish resemble the common carp (page 54), but they do not have barbels at the
corners of the mouth while common carp do. When sold as bait, goldfish are some-
times called “Baltimore minnows.” They feed mostly on aquatic insects and plant
material and commonly range from 10-20 inches in the wild. The state record is 3
pounds, 5 ounces.
Goldfish are known to hybridize with common carp, creating individuals with
characteristics of both species, complicating identification.
The brook silverside occurs statewide and is an important forage species for many
fish such as largemouth bass, white bass, and crappie. It usually prefers the surface
area of reservoirs, lakes, and rivers. Often found in schools, they feed on small in-
sects, midges, and zooplankton.
Brook silversides range from 2.5-4 inches, to a maximum of about 5 inches. One
other silverside, the inland silverside, is also found in Tennessee and it is listed as an
Aquatic Nuisance Species (see page 54).
42

-- 46 of 80 --

Brian James
Brian James
mouth of chestnut lamprey
Brian James
Stoneroller
(Campostoma sp.)
Other name: horny-head
Chestnut Lamprey
(Ichthyomyzon castaneus)
Other name: lamprey eel
The stoneroller, commonly called “horny-head” because of the conspicuous head
tubercles on nuptial (breeding) males, is characteristic of small- to medium-sized
streams with clear, cool water. It is also found in moderate, sometimes rapid current,
with gravel or rubble bottom, or in pools and riffles, but can also be found in clear
reservoirs. It is tolerant of muddy or silty waters. An herbivore, the stoneroller eats
algae and other minute plants found in the mud and on stone surfaces.
Stonerollers can be found throughout Tennessee and are usually very common.
They average about 4 inches in length and the range is 2-10 inches. The state record
is 10 ounces.
Chestnut lampreys are one of seven native species
of lampreys found in the state and are the most primi-
tive fish in Tennessee. The chestnut lamprey is also
one of three species in the state that parasitize other
fish. However, these species have not been found to
have a detrimental impact on the population of the
host fish. While the host fish usually does not die as
a direct result of the attack, it may die of secondary infections that develop in the
remaining wound where the lamprey was attached. The other four species are not
parasitic on fish.
Found statewide, chestnut lampreys usually inhabit rivers, reservoirs, and medi-
um or large streams. Adults begin migrating into smaller streams in early spring and
spawn in April or May. Although lampreys may resemble the American eel, lampreys
do not have jaws or pectoral fins. The mouths of adults resemble a sucking disc.
43

-- 47 of 80 --

Wes Neal
David Roddy
Atlantic Needlefish
(Strongylura marina)
Other name: needlefish
Striped Mullet
(Mugil cephalus)
Other name: mullet
Atlantic needlefish, mainly a marine species, are a recent inhabitant of Tennessee
and are thought to have migrated into the Tennessee River from the gulf coast by way
of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway. Reported catches have mainly come from
Kentucky and Pickwick reservoirs with recent sightings on the Cumberland River.
Needlefish tend to congregate in tailwaters below dams and at steam plants dur-
ing the winter, and are usually found near the surface. As their name implies, needle-
fish do not contain much meat, thus they are not of much value as a food fish. They
feed mainly on fish such as minnows and shad, with adults ranging from 8-20 inches.
The state record is 1.6 ounces.
Their impact on native species is unknown at this time, but could negatively im-
pact the food base of our native sport fish.
Striped mullet are mainly a marine species that has also recently inhabited the
Tennessee River, mainly Kentucky Reservoir, by way of the Tennessee-Tombigbee
Waterway. Like needlefish, striped mullet have a tolerance for freshwater and are
generally found in open water, traveling in schools near the surface below dams and
at steam plants. They can also be found near steam plants during the winter.
Adults feed on plants and plant material and the range is 9-15 inches in length.
Impacts on Tennessee’s native species are currently unknown.
44

-- 48 of 80 --

David Roddy
Tilapia
Nile Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus)
Other names: tilapia, cichlid, mouthbrooder
The Nile tilapia is one of many freshwater cichlids that is laterally compressed,
deep bodied, with distinctive, regular, vertical stripes extending far down the body
including the caudal (tail) fin, variable coloration, and has a long dorsal fin. The na-
tive range is in the tropical and subtropical areas of Africa and the Middle East.
This species occurs in freshwater habitats like rivers, lakes, ponds and irrigation
channels. Populations are currently established in the states of Mississippi, Florida,
and Tennessee. In Tennessee, the species is found in Cheatham and Old Hickory
reservoirs, where there is an established fishery due to the “thermal refuge” provided
by the steam plants.
Adults reach up to 24 inches in length and up to 9.5 pounds, with the average
caught in Tennessee being 8-10 inches. The state record is 6 pounds, 5.5 ounces. The
species lives for up to nine years, and tolerates brackish water and survives tempera-
tures between 46-108 F. It is an omnivore, feeding on plankton as well as on higher
plants, but will take common baits and lures used to catch bluegill and other sunfish.
Sexual maturity is reached at 3-6 months depending on temperature and repro-
duction only occurs when temperatures are over 68 F. Spawns may occur every 30
days, allowing several spawnings per year. Females will incubate eggs inside their
mouths for approximately a week. Up to 200 fry are kept in the mouth, until fry are
free swimming.
The Nile tilapia was introduced the United States for aquaculture purposes for its
flavor and high source of protein. It has since been introduced into Tennessee public
waters through escape or release from aquaculture ponds and private waters where
they have been stocked for vegetation control and forage enhancement.
45

-- 49 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
TWRA Staff
TWRA Staff
Brian James
Brian James
Banded Sculpin (Cottus carolinae)
Blue Sucker
(Cycleptus elongates)
Bluntnose Minnow (Pimephales notatus)
Bullhead Minnow (Pimephales vigilax)
Fathead Minnow (Pimephales promelas)
Other Tennessee Fish
46

-- 50 of 80 --

Bart Carter
Brian James
Brian James
Brian James
Brian James
Creek Chub
(Semotilus atromaculatus)
Spotted Sucker (Minytrema melanops)
Logperch (Percina caprodes)
Northern Hog Sucker (Hypentelium nigricans)
Northern Studfish (Fundulus catenatus)
47

-- 51 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
Aquatic Nuisance Species
Aquatic non-native animals and plants that escape or are accidently or purpose-
fully released into waters where they are not native can become a nuisance. Aquatic
nuisance species (ANS) can pose a threat to Tennessee’s waterways and other aquatic
environments, both economically and ecologically. Other terms used in place of “nui-
sance” may include “invasive, nonindigenous, alien, exotic, and undesirable.” Examples
of aquatic nuisance fish, crayfish, snails, mussels, clams, and plant species that are ei-
ther found in Tennessee, or are a potential threat to the state are discussed below.
You can do your part to prevent the spread of aquatic nuisance species by never
releasing or stocking fish, plants, or other animals into a body of water unless they
currently inhabit that body of water, (this includes any aquatic species from aquari-
ums). In addition, eliminating water from livewells, motors and other equipment
before transporting them from one body of water to another will help eliminate in-
troductions of ANS. Anglers who catch an unusual species discussed in this ANS
section, or a species that has not been found in Tennessee, should report it to their
nearest TWRA office or TW RA’s Fi sheries Division (page 74). For more informa-
tion on how you can help, visit www.ProtectYourWaters.net, or several of the links
found in “Further Reading” (page 73). For more information on Tennessee’s Aquatic
Nuisance Species, and references to information contained here, visit: https://
www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/twra/documents/invasive-species/Tennessee-Aquatic-
Nuisance-Species-Management-Plan.pdf
Alewife (Alosa pseudoharengus)
Other names: shad, herring, bigeye herring
The alewife is native to the Atlantic coast from South Carolina to Newfound-
land. Many landlocked populations have been established or introduced into about
twenty states, including Tennessee. Most introductions have been intentional for use
as a forage species. In Tennessee, they were initially stocked into Dale Hollow and
Watauga reservoirs, but can now be found in several reservoirs located downstream.
There have also been illegal introductions of this species into Norris and possibly
other Tennessee reservoirs.
Alewife feed primarily on microscopic plants and animals (zooplankton), but oc-
casionally on fish eggs and small fish. Most alewife average between 2 and 6 inches,
but can measure up to 12 inches in length, though these are seldom seen by anglers.
Alewife introductions have had negative impacts on reservoir fisheries in several
states, including walleye populations in Tennessee. Alewife and blueback herring
(next page) feed on the eggs and recently-hatched walleye young. Also, both alewife
48

-- 52 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
U.S. Geological Survey
and blueback herring produce thiaminase, an enzyme that destroys thiamine, a cru-
cial enzyme for egg development and survival of many native fish.
Blueback Herring (Alosa aestivalis)
Other names: blue herring, shad
Blueback herring are native to the Atlantic coast from Novia Scotia to Florida.
Landlocked populations have been introduced in several states, including Tennessee,
where it was first collected from Melton Hill reservoir in 1998. Since then, it has been
found in Tellico and Boone reservoirs. Introductions into these systems is thought to
have been by anglers using live bait or intentional stocking as a forage species.
Because they feed primarily on plankton, they are most likely to be found in open
water near the surface. They are also known to eat fish eggs. Adults reach lengths up
to 12-14 inches, although they average 4-8 inches.
This species has had negative impacts on reservoir fisheries in several states, with
introductions coinciding with decreased abundance of black crappie, largemouth
bass, and white bass.
Asian Swamp Eel (Monopterus albus)
Other names: Asian rice eel, ricefield eel,
rice paddy eel
The Asian swamp eel is native to Asia and possi-
bly Northeast Australia. It was introduced to Hawaii
prior to 1900, presumably by Asian immigrants as a
food fish. It has also been introduced to several wa-
terways in Florida and Georgia.
This eel, with its elongated, snake-like body and
small eyes, can grow to 3 feet and weigh up to one
pound. Swamp eels feed on land and in the water
where they are voracious predators. Food items in-
clude aquatic insects, mollusks, freshwater shrimp,
crayfish, snails, frogs and fish. They are highly mo-
bile and may travel considerable distances over land
to find new feeding and breeding areas. The swamp
eel may resemble our native American eel (page 40),
49

-- 53 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
female
male
but the swamp eel has no fins.
Detrimental impacts of the swamp eel in Tennessee are currently unknown, but
because they are generalized predators, they have the potential to pose serious eco-
logical impacts to native fauna, including fish, frogs, and aquatic invertebrates.
Brook Stickleback (Culaea inconstans)
Other name: five-spined stickleback
The brook stickleback is native to the Atlantic and Arctic drainages from Nova
Scotia to the Northwest Territories, Great Lakes, Mississippi River basins south to
southern Ohio and New Brunswick, and west to Manitoba and East British Colom-
bia.
Occurrences outside of its native range have been recorded in 12 states, including
Tennessee. Introductions have resulted through escape from hatcheries, contami-
nated sport fish stockings, and bait bucket releases. This species commonly occurs in
shipments of bait minnows from the Midwest, usually mixed with fathead minnows
(see page 46). Brook sticklebacks reach a maximum size of 3.5 inches, and occupy
streams, swamps, and vegetated bays of lakes. Their diet includes small crustaceans,
insect larvae, snails, leeches and fish eggs.
Impacts of this species on native fauna are largely unknown, although it has been
noted that it preys on fish eggs and is aggressive.
50

-- 54 of 80 --

silver carp gill rakers
bighead carp
gill rakers
Brian James
Brian James
TWRA Staff
Bighead Carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis)
Other name: Asian carp
Silver Carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix)
Other name: Asian carp,
jumping carp
The bighead and silver carp are large
filter-feeding fish native to East Asia
and China that were imported into Ar-
kansas in the 1970s for use in aquacul-
ture ponds to control plankton. By the
early 1980s both species had escaped
into the Mississippi River and its tribu-
taries. They are now well established in
the Mississippi River and its tributaries
and are becoming more abundant in the
Tennessee River system and parts of the
Cumberland River system.
They inhabit large river systems,
lakes, and impoundments, often feed-
ing in schools at the water’s surface. Be-
ing filter-feeders, their diet consist of
phytoplankton, detritus, zooplankton,
and insect larva. Bighead carp can reach
lengths of 3 feet and can weigh up to 100
pounds, while the silver carp can weigh
as much as 60 pounds. The state record
for bighead carp is 90 pounds, and 31 pounds, 15 ounces for silver carp.
51
Silver carp gill rakers

-- 55 of 80 --

young specimens
Doug Hardesty
David Roddy
Characteristic differences between adult big-
head and silver carp:
1) Bighead carp usually have dark blotches
along the top (dorsal) area whereas the
silver carp does not;
2) The gill rakers (under the gill cover) of the
bighead carp are comb-like, whereas the
gill rakers of the silver carp are sponge-like
(see page 51);
3) Bighead carp have a smooth keel (ridge)
that extends only partway along the belly
from the vent, whereas on the silver carp
the keel extends to the throat along the
belly.
Be aware that hybrids of these two species may
exhibit characteristics of both species.
The young of both bighead and silver carp (above) look similar to several species
of native baitfish, such as gizzard and threadfin shad (see page 34), and could there-
fore be spread through the use or release of live bait collected from infested waters.
However, both native shad species have a dorsal filament, a dark circular spot behind
the gill covers, and jagged (rough) keels on their bellies. The large, low-set eyes of
these Asian carp may also help separate them from other native bait fish species.
Because of their diet, both species may compete for food with native planktivores,
including paddlefish, bigmouth buffalo, gizzard shad, many species of larval fish, and
freshwater mussels. The silver carp can also leap up to 10 feet out of the water when
disturbed by watercraft and may potentially cause human injury or fatality.
Note that these two species, along with the black carp (below) cannot be pos-
sessed or transported alive (see page 71).
Black Carp (Mylopharyngodon piceus)
Other names: snail carp, black amur, Chinese roach
The black carp is native to rivers of East Asia and was first brought into the U.S.
in the early 1970s and again in the 1980s as a food fish and as a biological control of
parasite carrying snails in aquaculture ponds.
52

-- 56 of 80 --

David Roddy
The black carp has been found in the Tennessee portion of Mississippi River since
2014 and recent collections have documented their presence in Mississippi River
tributaries, Reelfoot Lake, and Kentucky Reservoir (TN River). Their diet consists
mainly of snails and mussels, but they will also eat freshwater shrimp, crayfish, and
insects. They can grow to lengths greater than 4 feet and weigh more than 80 pounds.
The black carp can compete for food with native fish species and has the potential
to seriously impact native mussel and snail populations, many of which are threat-
ened or endangered.
Grass Carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella)
Other names: white amur, amur, carp
Like the previous three Asian carp, the grass carp is native to several large rivers of
East Asia, and has been widely introduced across the U.S. into small ponds and lakes
for the purpose of controlling aquatic vegetation. Grass carp were first imported to
the U.S. in 1963 for research on their use as a control for nuisance aquatic vegetation.
Grass carp are found throughout the state, usually in small ponds and lakes. They
are also often found in rivers and lakes where they have escaped from stocked ponds.
In Tennessee, only triploid (sterile) grass carp are legal to stock into private ponds
and small lakes for control of aquatic vegetation.
Grass carp are capable of surviving in all but the smallest ponds and can tolerate
a wide range of temperatures. This transplant feeds on most forms of aquatic veg-
etation and will even eat terrestrial vegetation that comes in contact with the water.
They are rarely caught by anglers, but when caught, they average about 20 inches,
with a range of 10-36 inches. They can reach lengths greater than 4 feet and can
weigh over 50 pounds. The state record is 70 pounds.
Grass carp have been known to clean entire lakes of all aquatic plants and then
consume organic detritus and animal material. Negative impacts on native fauna
include competition for food with invertebrates and fish, along with changes in the
composition of the aquatic plant, phytoplankton, and invertebrate communities.
They can also cause enrichment and eutrophication of ponds and lakes when they
expel undigested plant material.
53

-- 57 of 80 --

Brian James
TWRA Staff
snout of an inland
silverside
Eric Ganus
Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio)
Other names: carp, Israeli carp, mirror carp, leather carp, buglemouth
Common carp are not native to North America and were introduced into the
Northeast in the late 1800s. Since then, they have expanded their range to every
state, except Alaska. Common carp inhabit ponds, lakes, reservoirs, streams and riv-
ers, and can flourish in muddy waters with low dissolved oxygen and high water
temperatures.
The common carp has a barbel on each side of the upper jaw, which helps distin-
guish it from other carp-like species.
Carp will eat any plant or animal matter found on the stream or lake bottom. Im-
portant foods are plants, small crustaceans, and worms. Carp are abundant through-
out the state and average 15 inches in length with a range of 10-32 inches, and can
weigh over 50 pounds. The state record is 53 pounds.
Genetic strains are frequently seen that have only a few large scales (“mirror
carp”), or lack scales entirely (“leather carp”). Large numbers of common carp are
caught and sold annually by commercial fishers and are considered a sportfish in
other parts of the world.
The common carp stirs up the bottom during feeding, resulting in increased silt-
ation and turbidity which can degrade clean substrates (needed for fish spawning),
smother fish eggs, and destroy rooted aquatic plants that may provide habitat for
native fish species.
Inland Silverside (Menidia beryllina)
Other names: silverside, pin minnow
54

-- 58 of 80 --

Dave Jude
The inland silverside is native to coastal and freshwater habitats from Massachu-
setts to Mexico, inland up the Mississippi River to Illinois, including the Arkansas
and Red Rivers. It has been introduced outside of its native range in about 6 other
states, where it was intentionally stocked as forage for sport fish in most locations. In
Tennessee, this species has expanded from the western part of the state to invade the
Cumberland and Tennessee river systems, and may be expanding by natural disper-
sion.
Inland silversides average from 3-4 inches, to a maximum of about 5.5 inches,
with a diet consisting of midge larvae, small insects, and zooplankton. It is similar in
appearance to the brook silverside, but the inland silverside does not have a beak-like
snout (see brook silverside, page 42). In addition, the scales on an inland silverside
are easily seen with the naked eye.
Introduced populations of inland silverside in some states have displaced or re-
placed several other fish species, including brook silversides, through competition
for food. The effect of the inland silverside invasion on native aquatic fauna in the
Cumberland and Tennessee rivers is currently unknown, and more time is needed to
fully understand the impact it may have on brook silverside populations.
Round Goby (Neogobius melanostomus)
The round goby is native to marine and freshwater environments in Eurasia. First
discovered in 1990 in Canada, they were introduced into the Great Lakes by way of
transoceanic freighter ballast water from the Black and Caspian seas.
Round gobies are not currently present in Tennessee, but have access to America’s
largest watersheds, including the Mississippi River. Being a bottom-dwelling fish,
gobies prefer rocky or gravel substrates, and are voracious feeders, eating small fish,
fish eggs, aquatic insects, and exotic zebra mussels (page 64). They average 3-6 inches
in length. Round gobies look similar to our native sculpins (page 46), but the goby
has fused pelvic (bottom) fins, whereas our native sculpins have separate pelvic fins.
Being such an aggressive fish with voracious feeding habits, round gobies may af-
fect native species such as sculpins, darters, or other bottom-dwelling fish through
competition for habitat and food. They may also impact game fish populations by
feeding upon the eggs of nest spawners such as smallmouth bass.
55

-- 59 of 80 --

Jim Grazio
Steffen Zienert
Rudd (Scardinius erythrophthalmus)
Other name: redfin
The rudd is native to Europe and Central Asia and was initially introduced to the
U.S. as an ornamental fish in the early 1900s. More recently, this species has been
reared by fish farmers and sold as bait in several states, and bait bucket releases are
probably the primary method of introduction. The rudd has not been found in Ten-
nessee, but has been introduced into about 20 other states, including the neighbor-
ing states of Alabama, Arkansas, and Missouri.
Adult rudd are commonly 8-12 inches long and feed on zooplankton, aquatic in-
sects, plants, algae, crustaceans, and occasionally, small fish and fish eggs. The rudd
resembles our native golden shiner (page 41), but the rudd has a scaled keel on the
midline of the belly and adults have bright red fins.
The impact of the introductions of this species on native species is largely un-
known. It has been shown that rudd and golden shiner are capable of hybridizing in
a laboratory, and this could result in genetic integrity implications to native golden
shiner populations. Additionally, the rudd competes with native fish for invertebrate
food sources.
Ruffe (Gymnocephalus cernuus)
Other names: Eurasian ruffe, pope
The ruffe is native to France, England, most of Siberia, and the Baltic Sea. It was
first collected in North America in 1986 from the St. Louis River at the border of
Minnesota and Wisconsin. It is mainly found in and around the Great Lakes region
56

-- 60 of 80 --

U.S. Geological Survey
of the U.S. Like many others, this species was probably unintentionally introduced
with discharged ballast water from ships.
Adult ruffe average 5-6 inches, but can reach lengths up to 10 inches. The majority
of its diet consists of benthic aquatic invertebrates, and it is known to eat fish eggs.
In some areas where the ruffe has been introduced, it has quickly become the domi-
nant species, comprising an estimated 80 percent of fish abundances. Several native
species have declined since the introduction of this fish into the Great Lakes region,
which suggests that ruffe compete for food with native benthic-feeding fishes.
Snakehead (Channa and Parachanna spp.)
The Northern snakehead, one of
approximately 30 species of snake-
heads, is native to parts of Asia and
Africa. The first report of this fish in
the U.S. came from California in 1997,
and has since been found in about 10
other states, including Arkansas and
Mississippi. In Tennessee, a dead giant
snakehead was found in a small lake
in West Tennessee in 2005. They were
typically introduced into these states
when live fish purchased for food or
for aquariums were released into pub-
lic waters. It is illegal to possess live
snakeheads in Tennessee.
Snakeheads inhabit small to large
streams, rivers, ponds, reservoirs, and
lakes, and are often found in shallow
areas where there is aquatic vegeta-
tion. Juvenile snakeheads eat zooplank-
ton, insect larvae, small crustaceans, and small fish, whereas adults become voracious
predators consuming fish, crustaceans, frogs, reptiles, small birds, and mammals.
Many species can attain a size up to about 35 inches in length.
Snakeheads look similar to our native bowfin (page 39), except snakeheads have:
1) pelvic fins close to the gills, 2) an elongated anal fin and 3) no bony plate under the
throat between the jaws. Both of these species have small teeth in the mouth.
57

-- 61 of 80 --

TWRA Staff
female
male
All reports of snakeheads caught by anglers in Tennessee thus far have been bow-
fins, but TWRA encourages anyone who thinks they may have caught a snakehead
to keep it and contact the TWRA Fisheries Division.
The predatory nature of snakeheads indicates that their introduction could nega-
tively impact populations of native fishes through direct predation, competition for
food resources, and alteration of food webs. If so, the impacts to recreational fishing
could be substantially detrimental over time.
Western Mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis)
Eastern Mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki)
Other name: Gambusia
The western mosquitofish was probably native to the coastal plain from West Ala-
bama northward to southern Illinois, and westward into East Mexico where the ex-
tent of its range is uncertain. It is native to mainly West Tennessee, but has expanded
eastward by a combination of natural dispersal and undocumented introductions.
The eastern mosquitofish is native to the Atlantic and Gulf Coast Slope drainages
as far west as East Alabama. Exact determination of the native range is difficult be-
cause these two species have been widely stocked by humans as a biological control
for mosquitoes. They have been stocked in at least 36 states outside of their known
native range.
Both species are very similar in appearance, and have an upturned mouth, allow-
ing them to be an effective surface feeder. They feed on aquatic and terrestrial in-
sects, microcrustaceans, snails, fish eggs, and larval fish, including their own young.
Females reach lengths of 2.5 inches, while adult males are smaller and only attain a
length of 1.5 inches.
Although mosquitofish prey on mosquito larvae and are widely introduced as
mosquito control agents, review of the literature on mosquito control has not sup-
ported the view that mosquitofish are effective in reducing mosquito populations.
Mosquitofish introductions can lead to algal blooms when they eat zooplankton
grazers or cause an increase in mosquitoes if they eat invertebrate predators. Mos-
quitofish are also extremely aggressive and can affect native fishes through direct
58

-- 62 of 80 --

Carl Williams
Andre Karwath
competition and often attack, kill, or eat other fish. The biggest negative impact of
mosquitofish is on the federally endangered Barrens topminnow (Fundulus julisia)
in Tennessee due to their predation of topminnow eggs and larvae.
Kentucky River Crayfish (Faxonius juvenilis)
Other name: rusty crayfish
The Kentucky River cray-
fish is native to tributaries
of the Ohio River in south-
western Ohio, northern Ken-
tucky, and southeast Indiana.
It has been spread primar-
ily through bait bucket releases
and in Tennessee, has been collect-
ed in the Clinch, Holston, Nolichucky, and
Tellico rivers.
Kentucky River crayfish inhabit lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers, and utilize
rocks, logs, or other debris for cover. They feed on a variety of aquatic plants and
invertebrates, clams, fish eggs, and small fish, and can reach 4 inches long.
When introduced, negative impacts of this crayfish include destruction of aquatic
vegetation, direct competition with native crayfishes, and predation on other aquatic
species.
Marbled Crayfish (Procambarus fallax f. virginalis)
Other name: Marmorkrebs
59

-- 63 of 80 --

Distinguishing mark:
a rusty/red circular spot on the cephalothorax
Carl Williams
The marbled crayfish is a parthenogenetic crayfish, a form consisting of only fe-
males which are capable of producing offspring with unfertilized eggs. The origin of
this unusual form is not certain, but most biologists agree it was probably derived
from captive populations of the slough crayfish (Procambarus fallax). A native spe-
cies to Florida and southern Georgia, the slough crayfish is a popular species in the
pet trade industry, through which it has been distributed to aquarium enthusiasts
around the world. Although no wild populations of the marbled crayfish have been
documented in the United States to date, it has become established in several other
countries.
Because of its ability to establish a wild population from the release of a single
specimen, wildlife managers consider it an extremely high risk invasive species with
a potential of causing harm to native aquatic organisms.
Rusty Crayfish
(Faxonius rusticus)
The rusty crayfish is native to the Ohio River system in Kentucky, Ohio, and Indi-
ana, and the Lake Erie drainage in Michigan and Ohio. Primarily through bait buck-
et releases, it has been introduced into at least 20 additional states including two
sites in Tennessee; the German Creek embayment of Cherokee Reservoir (Grainger
County), and Little Creek in the city of Bristol (Sullivan County).
Like most crayfish species, the rusty crayfish is omnivorous, feeding on a variety
of food items, including aquatic plants and algae, small insects, crustaceans, and
snails. Dead or dying fish and other forms of carrion are also consumed. The rusty
crayfish can reach lengths up to 4 inches and typically has a life span from 2-3 years.
Because of its aggressive behavior and ability to adapt to a variety of aquatic habi-
tats from small streams to large rivers, and even reservoirs, the rusty crayfish can
quickly expand its range causing negative impacts to native aquatic organisms in-
cluding our native crayfish and fish species.
60

-- 64 of 80 --

Carl Williams
U.S. Geological Survey
Virile Crayfish (Faxonius virilis)
Other name: Northern crayfish
The virile crayfish is native as far north as Hudson Bay. Southward, it occurs from
New England to western Montana and through the Missouri, Mississippi and Ohio
River basins to Oklahoma and northern Arkansas. It has been widely introduced
outside its native range and, in Tennessee, this species has been introduced to the
Nolichucky, French Broad, and Holston river systems, as well as a tributary to Watts
Bar Reservoir. It is well established in Douglas Reservoir and its tributaries. Most
introductions have probably been the result of bait bucket releases.
The virile crayfish is large, with adults ranging from 2-5 inches, and can be found
in rivers, streams, and ponds with abundant cover such as rocks, logs, or deposits of
organic debris.
Negative impacts include destruction of aquatic vegetation, direct competition
with native crayfish, possible hybridization, and predation on other aquatic species.
Asian Clam (Corbicula fluminea)
Other name: corbicula
The Asian clam is native to China, Korea and
Russia. It was first collected in the U.S. in 1938
from the Columbia River in Washington State. It is
now found in at least 38 states, including Tennes-
see, where it is found in almost every river and res-
ervoir, with the exception of a few creeks and streams
in the Blue Ridge and on the Cumberland Plateau.
This species is thought to have entered the U.S. as a food
item used by Chinese immigrants. Current methods of introduction include bait
bucket releases, introductions by people who buy them as a food item in markets,
and by natural dispersion of their free-swimming larvae.
The Asian clam is a small, filter-feeding bivalve that rarely exceeds 1.5 inches in
length, and occupies silt, sand, and gravel substrates in creeks, rivers, reservoirs, and
ponds.
61

-- 65 of 80 --

U.S. Geological Survey
U.S. Geological Survey
The greatest ecological impact of this species’ introduction is competition for
habitat and food with our native mussel species, many of which are threatened or
endangered.
Channeled Apple Snail (Pomacea canaliculata)
The channeled apple snail is widely distributed in
South America, and has been introduced through-
out Southeast Asia where it has become a major crop
pest, particularly in rice fields. Introductions in the
U.S. (through aquarium releases) have been detected
in about eight states but not in Tennessee. However,
they have been found in the neighboring states of Ala-
bama and Georgia.
The channeled apple snail is a large globular snail that can
reach lengths greater than 3.5 inches. This species is a voracious
herbivore and will consume almost any plant. It is a major crop
pest and poses a serious threat to many wetlands around the world
through potential habitat modification and competition with native species.
Chinese Mystery Snail (Cipangopaludina chinensis)
Other names: Asian mystery snail, Chinese apple snail,
Asian apple snail
The Chinese mystery snail is native to Southeast
Asia, Japan, and East Russia. This species has become
widespread in scattered locations and is often found
in ponds, streams, or lake margins where there is
vegetation and a soft substrate.
This snail was first found in California Chinese
markets in 1892. It is now established on the West and
East coasts, the Great Lakes region, and some of the Gulf
states. In Tennessee, it has been found in a lake in Nashville
and a pond in Hawkins County.
Chinese mystery snails can reach 2.5 inches in length and feed
on algae such as diatoms, phytoplankton, and detritus. This species can serve as a
vector for various parasites and diseases which can infect humans and they compete
with native snails for food and space.
62

-- 66 of 80 --

U.S. Geological Survey
U.S. Geological Survey
David Roddy
New Zealand Mud Snail (Potamopyrgus antipodarum)
The New Zealand mud snail is native to freshwater
streams and lakes of New Zealand and was first discov-
ered in the U.S. in the Snake River in Idaho in 1987.
They are now established in about 10 western states,
and their rapid range expansion is probably the re-
sult of snail hitchhikers attached to boots, wad-
ers, nets, and other equipment. This snail is a
very small aquatic snail ranging from less than ¼
inch up to ½ inch in length. It feeds on diatoms
and plant and animal detritus.
In suitable habitats, this snail can reach high
densities (greater than 100,000/m2), and has
been shown to drastically alter primary pro-
duction in some streams in western states. Cer-
tain types of aquatic invertebrates (mayflies,
stoneflies, and caddisflies) which are primary
foods for trout, darters, and young fish, also
appear to be declining in abundance in some
western states. Introductions of this snail may
also have implications to native snails through
direct competition.
Zebra Mussel (Dreissena polymorpha)
Zebra mussels are native to the Black,
Caspian and Azov seas, and were first
discovered in North America in 1988 in
the Great Lakes. The release of larval ze-
bra mussels during the ballast water ex-
change of commercial cargo ships trav-
eling from the Black Sea to the Great Lakes
is thought to be the way it was introduced.
By 1992, zebra mussels were established in
many rivers south of the Great Lakes including the
Cumberland, Mississippi, and Tennessee rivers. Ze-
bra mussels are small, reaching a maximum length of
about 1.5 inches, and feed primarily on algae by filter-
feeding.
While the harmful impacts of zebra mussels are many,
they are notorious for colonizing and constricting water flow to hydro-electric and
nuclear power plants, public water supply plants, and industrial facilities. Fishing
gear and boats can become colonized and fouled if left in the water for long periods,
while deterioration and corrosion of steel and concrete structures can also occur.
63

-- 67 of 80 --

Tyler Baker
Chris Evans
Zebra mussels also colonize on our native freshwater mussels, many of which are
endangered. Once attached to native mussels, zebra mussels restrict valve operation,
cause shell deformity, smother siphons, compete for food, and impair movement.
Didymo (Didymosphenia geminata)
Other names: rock snot
Didymo is a single-celled freshwater
diatom that can be identified under a mi-
croscope by its bottle-like shape. It is very
large in size, compared to other diatoms.
Didymo cannot be observed by the naked
eye until large colonial masses are formed.
Large colonies of didymo cover the
bottom of rivers appearing like a felt car-
pet, tufted masses, or even a white strand
of toilet paper. Colonies of didymo are white to brown and not slippery to the touch,
but rather feel more like wet wool. Didymo is native to North America, but only
recently has it taken on characteristics of an invasive species. Many of these blooms
are located at popular trout fisheries, suggesting that anglers are a likely vector for
the spread of this diatom.
In Tennessee, the known distribution of didymo is the Clinch River below Norris
Dam, South Holston River below South Holston Dam, Watauga River below Wilbur
Dam, Holston River below Cherokee Dam, and Obey River below Dale Hollow Dam.
Ongoing research seeks to identify effective control methods, biological effects,
and environmental factors contributing to blooms.
Anglers do not like didymo because it will foul their fishing tackle and possibly
reduce the number of fish available to catch, although this has not been documented
in Tennessee waters. Blooms also degrade the aesthetics of rivers.
Eurasian watermilfoil (Myrophyllum spicatum)
Other name: milfoil
Eurasian watermilfoil is a submersed,
bottom-rooted perennial, generally with
multiple stems that arise from the root
crown. Stems are branched with the leaves
typically in whorls of four, each “feather-
like,” ¾-1½ inches long with 12-24 finely
dissected segments on each side of a cen-
tral axis. Male and female flowers are on
an emergent spike that extends a few inch-
es above the surface of the water.
Although Eurasian watermilfoil forms viable seeds, its primary method of spread
is by fragmentation. Fragments may be formed by mechanical breakage associated
64

-- 68 of 80 --

David Roddy
Chris Evans
with boat traffic, flow and wave action
and by auto fragmentation that occurs
after flowering and also near the end of
the growing season. It begins its growth
earlier in the growing season than most
other species of submersed macrophytes
and branches near the surface to form a
dense canopy that prevents light penetra-
tion and functions to exclude other spe-
cies of submersed plants.
In Tennessee, this species is established primarily in reservoirs of the Tennessee
River system at depths up to 12 feet. It adversely impacts boating and various types
of water-based recreation, restricts access to ramps and other facilities, and reduces
the aesthetic value in areas of developed shoreline.
The native range of Eurasian watermilfoil includes Europe, Asia, and North Af-
rica. It was introduced into the United States in the early 1940s. This species is now
widespread in the eastern United States, ranging westward from the New England
states to Minnesota and southward to Florida and Texas. There are also populations
in Arizona, California, Oregon and Washington. In Tennessee, Eurasian watermilfoil
occurs in Kentucky, Nickajack, Chickamauga, Watts Bar, Fort Loudoun, Tellico, and
Melton Hill reservoirs.
Eurasian watermilfoil primarily spreads from waterbody to waterbody by frag-
ments on boat trailers and propellers of motors. Once established within a water-
body or drainage, watermilfoil can rapidly spread by fragments that are dispersed by
flow and wave action.
Hydrilla (Hydrilla verticillata)
Hydrilla is a submersed, rhizomatous,
bottom-rooted perennial with branching
stems. Small, pea-like tubers .25-.50 inches
long form at the ends of spreading rhi-
zomes in bottom sediments. Leaves along
lower stems are opposite or in whorls of 3
with the number of leaves in whorls typi-
cally increasing to 5-7 along the upper por-
tion of stems. Leaves have toothed margins
and small spines along the mid vein on the
underside. Two forms of hydrilla are found
in Tennessee: a dioecious form that has
male and female flowers on separate plants
and a monoecious form that has male and
female flowers on the same plant.
Hydrilla spreads primarily by fragmen-
tation and can survive drawdowns and
65

-- 69 of 80 --

other adverse conditions as a tuber. Stems of hydrilla branch near the water surface
and form a dense canopy that can “shade out” other species of submersed plants.
Because hydrilla has a lower light requirement than most other species of submersed
plants, it grows at greater depths and has been observed to reach the surface in 15
feet of water. Hydrilla has replaced Eurasian watermilfoil in many areas and contin-
ues to expand into habitat formerly colonized by Eurasian watermilfoil.
Because hydrilla can form dense surface mats, has a very high biomass, and pro-
duces large numbers of fragments, it can harm the aesthetics of waterways and nega-
tively impact boating and other types of water-based recreation. It can affect water
quality and clog screens at water intakes.
In Tennessee, it grows in reservoirs, rivers, springs, ponds, canals and small lakes.
It is well-established in Chickamauga, Nickajack, Pickwick, and Kentucky reservoirs
and in some watershed lakes near Reelfoot Lake.
The primary method for the spread of hydrilla from one waterbody to another is
by fragments on boat trailers and propellers of motors. Once established within a
waterbody, hydrilla can rapidly spread by fragments that are dispersed by flow and
wave action. Hydrilla can also be spread as an aquarium plant or as a contaminant
growing with other aquatic species that are sold as ornamentals for water gardens.
Spiny-leaf naiad (Najas minor)
Other name: brittle naiad
Spiny-leaf 	naiad 	is
a submersed, bottom-
rooted 	annual, 	with
a 	bushy 	appearance
as a result of profuse
branching from the up-
per portion of the stem.
The leaves are opposite
to 	subopposite, 	stiff
and recurved in the late
growing season, 0.25-
1.5 	inches 	long 	and
about a 0.25 of an inch
in width. Leaf margins
have 7-15 conspicuous teeth per side and an expanded sheath at the base of each
leaf. Male flowers and female flowers are on the same plant, the fruit that is produced
is greenish and slightly curved. The seeds, one per fruit, also are slightly curved, 0.75-
1.25 inches long with rectangular areolae in longitudinal rows.
Spiny-leaf naiad is an annual species that regrows from seed and is most com-
mon in reservoirs and ponds. Because the spiny-leaf naiad regrows from seed, it is
adapted to colonization of drawdown zones of reservoirs that are dewatered dur-
ing the winter months. The seed tolerates drying and freezing conditions that often
eliminate perennial species that regrow from underground vegetative parts.
66

-- 70 of 80 --

ALWAYS:
DRAIN BAIT BUCKET WATER ON LAND
DISPOSE OF UNWANTED BAIT IN THE TRASH
WWW.TNWILDLIFE.ORG
Because spiny-leaf naiad grows in shallow water areas in dense colonies, it can ad-
versely impact water quality and various types of water-based recreation and access
to ramps and other facilities in areas of developed shoreline. During the late summer
months, spiny-leaf naiad undergoes a natural “breakup” and stems with leaves float
to the surface to form dense, free-floating mats that frequently become covered with
algae and produce a smelly odor.
This species was introduced into the United States by shipping or possibly as an
aquarium introduction. It is widespread in the eastern United States from Illinois to
New York, south to Florida and west to Arkansas. Spiny-leaf is widely distributed in
Tennessee. All of the main stem TVA reservoirs along the Tennessee River have, or
in the past, have had populations of this species.
Once established in a waterbody, spiny-leaf can spread by seed that remains at-
tached in the leaf axils of floating fragments. Seed in the substrate may also be car-
ried and moved to other areas by flow and wave action or by waterfowl feeding on
them. As is the case with most submersed plants, fragments on boat trailers and
propellers of motors are another means of spread.
67

-- 71 of 80 --

Howard Jelks
Fish As Pets
Many people enjoy having fish and other aquatic life in aquariums, backyard
ponds or water gardens. Part of the responsibility for having these “artificial environ-
ments” is to know that some fish and aquatic plants require specialized conditions
and many can outgrow the size of the aquarium or water garden. Whatever the situ-
ation, whether the family gets tired of the fish or they outgrow the available space, it
is important to never release these fish into the natural environment.
It is important to never dump any aquatic plants or water from the aquarium or
water garden into or near any body of water or storm drain. While many of these
organisms will die, some will be able to survive. Those that survive have the potential
to create negative impacts on our natural environment and native species. Because of
these potential impacts, it is illegal for anyone to stock or release any plant or animal
into the public waters of the state.
For more information about prevention, impacts, and disposal of unwanted
aquatic life, visit www.habitattitude.net.
Some of the more common fish species that are sold as pets and that have been
caught by anglers in Tennessee are discussed below.
Oscar: (Astronotus ocellatus)
A native of South America, the oscar is a fish species in the aquarium trade that
has been caught or reported in Tennessee and in at least 19 other states or U.S. ter-
ritories. Although established in Florida since the late 1950s as a result of a fish farm
release, they have recently been reported by anglers in Tennessee. It is believed their
presence is the result of illegal releases/stockings by aquarium owners. Wild caught
oscars are normally dark in color with one or more orange-ringed spots (or ocelli)
near the tail fin and/or the dorsal fin.
Oscars commonly grow to 9-14 inches in length with a weight over 2 pounds, and
feed on fish, crayfish, worms, and insect larvae. Although the impact of oscars on
native species is unknown at this time, the hope is they will not survive once water
temperatures drop below their lethal limit of approximately 53 F.
68

-- 72 of 80 --

Dustin Myles
Pacu: (Myleus and Colossoma spp.)
Pacu, a common aquarium species that
is closely related to (and looks like) the pi-
ranha, is occasionally caught by anglers in
Tennessee. As in most cases in Tennessee,
their presence is a result of illegal releases by
aquarium owners. A native of South Ameri-
ca, the pacu can easily outgrow their aquar-
ium space since they can reach two feet or
more in length. For this reason, they are not
recommended for most aquarium owners.
Pacu mainly eat seeds, nuts and vegeta-
tion in the wild, and being a tropical fish, it is
believed they will die when exposed to cold
water temperatures (unless they inhabit a
thermal refuge such as a steam plant). How-
ever, if released during the summer, pacu
may survive temporarily and may compete
with native species for habitat or introduce
exotic parasites or diseases into the environ-
ment.
In addition to attaining a larger size, pacu have square, human-like teeth, some-
times in a double row, with a slight underbite, whereas piranha have pointed, sharp
teeth with a heavy underbite. Most piranhas normally attain a length up to 10-12
inches, although some species may grow larger. To add to the confusion, one of the
common aquarium species of pacu is the red-bellied pacu, while a common aquari-
um species of piranha is the red-bellied piranha.
69

-- 73 of 80 --

Brian James
Redtail Catfish: (Phractocephalus hemioliopterus)
As with the previous two species, the redtail catfish is a native of South America.
In 2010, a couple of specimens were reported to have been caught from the Cumber-
land River and may be the result of either a release from an aquarium or escapement
from backyard ponds during the Nashville flood in May 2010.
The impacts of the redtail catfish on native fish species is unknown, although they
are very predacious and will eat anything they can get in their mouth. This tropi-
cal fish should not survive Tennessee winters. However, steam plants could provide
thermal refuges. Because they get very large (up to 2-3 feet or more, and over 50
pounds) and will eat about any fish smaller than themselves, redtail catfish are not
suitable for most aquarium owners.
Again, instead of illegally releasing fish or other aquatic animals or plants into
public waters of the state, aquarium owners should review the information at www.
habitattitude.net for advice on disposing of unwanted aquarium species.
Illustration © Department of Primary Industries and
Regional Development, Western Australia
Don’t
dump
that
fish!
Help keep
aquarium fish
where they belong.

-- 74 of 80 --

DO NOT USE LIVE ASIAN CARP FOR BAIT
Bighead and silver carp are illegal to
possess alive. Shad are legal bait fish.
The easiest way to tell them apart is to look
at the dorsal (top) fin. Both shad have a long,
thread-like fin that extends toward the tail.
Asian carp do not have this thread-like fin.
Aquatic Animals Prohibited
In Tennessee
It is unlawful to possess or transport live specimens of the following animals in
Tennessee:
Blueback Herring: (Alosa aestivalis) ......................................................................49
Swamp Eels: (all members of the Family Synbranchidae) ...................................49
Bighead Carp: (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis) .......................................................51
Silver Carp: (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) .........................................................51
Black Carp: (Mylopharyngodon piceus)..................................................................52
Round Goby: (Neogobius melanostomus) ..............................................................55
Rudd: (Scardinius erythrophthalmus) .....................................................................56
Ruffe: (Gymnocephalus cernuus) ............................................................................ 56
Snakehead: (all members of the Family Channidae)............................................57
Marbled Crayfish (Marmorkreb): (Procambarus fallax f. virginalis) ............ 59
New Zealand Mud Snail: (Potamopyrgus antipodarum) ..................................63
Zebra Mussel: (Dreissena polymorpha) .................................................................63
Live Bait Regulations
Tennessee has live bait reg-
ulations pertaining to which
species can be used for bait,
and how they can be har-
vested, sold and transported.
For the current live bait regu-
lations pick up a copy of the
Tennessee Fishing Guide wher-
ever fishing licenses are sold
or log on to the TWRA web-
site at www.tnwildlife.org to
review it.
Under 	no 	circumstance
shall live fish, crayfish, or sala-
manders be intentionally re-
leased into Tennessee waters
away from the waters from
which they were harvested.
71

-- 75 of 80 --

Tennessee Angler Recognition
Program & First Fish
Anglers have a way to be acknowledged for their fishing accomplishments in the
Volunteer State. The Tennessee Angler Recognition Program (TARP) is designed to
acknowledge anglers who catch any of the current twenty-five species of fish that
meet or exceed minimum trophy lengths, to encourage catch-and-release of trophy-
size fish, and to provide the TWRA with information documenting large fish caught
throughout the state.
TARP should not be confused with the State Record Fish Program which recognizes
anglers who catch a new state record fish (largest by weight for that species in the
state). Instead, TARP recognizes anglers who catch trophy-size fish that are not neces-
sarily state records.
The First Fish Program recognizes and presents anyone catching their first fish in
Tennessee a certificate for free.
For further information about TARP, specific qualifications, qualifying species, an
application form, along with information about the State Record Fish Program and
the First Fish Award, consult the Tennessee Fishing Guide, the TWRA website, or call
615-781-6575.
72

-- 76 of 80 --

Further Reading
For individuals interested in a more comprehensive list of fish and aquatic nuisance
species, along with more detailed information concerning their description, life his-
tory, habitat requirements and distribution, the following publications and websites
are recommended. These sources were used in-part for information in this guide.
Etnier, David A. and W.C. Starnes. 1993. The Fishes of Tennessee.
The University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville. 681 pp.
or view at: http://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_utpress/2/
Pflieger, William L. 1975. The Fishes of Missouri.
Missouri Department of Conservation, Jefferson City. 343 pp.
Mettee, M.F., P.E. O’Neil, and J.M. Pierson. 1996.
Fishes of Alabama and the Mobile Basin. State of Alabama. 820 pp.
Page, Lawrence M. and Brooks M. Burr. 1991.
A Field Guide to Freshwater Fishes of North America, North of Mexico.
New York: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Walls, Jerry G. 2009. Crayfishes Of Lousiana.
Louisiana State University Press. 240pp.
https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/twra/documents/invasive-species/
Tennessee-Aquatic-Nuisance-Species-Management-Plan.pdf
http://www.invasivespeciesinfo.gov/aquatics/main.shtml
http://www.twra4streams.homestead.com
http://stopaquatichitchhikers.org
http://explorer.natureserve.org
www.fws.gov/fisheries
http://www.fishbase.org
http://www.invasive.org
http://www.asiancarp.us
http://www.aquatics.org
http://www.tnfish.org
http://nas.er.usgs.gov
73

-- 77 of 80 --

Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency
All office Hours: 8:00 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
Monday – Friday (local time)
Website: www.tnwildlife.org
Central Office – Nashville
Ellington Agricultural Center
5107 Edmondson Pike, Nashville, TN 37211
Nashville, TN 37204 ..........................................615-781-6500
Boating Education/Safety .................................615-781-6566
Boat Registration ................................................615-781-6522
Director’s Office..................................................615-781-6552
Fisheries Division ...............................................615-781-6575
Information & Education ................................... 615-781-6502
Law Enforcement ...............................................615-781-6580
License Division .................................................615-253-5189
Wildlife & Forestry Division ............................615-781-6610
Telecommunications Device for the Deaf .....615-781-6691
West Tennessee – Region I
200 Lowell Thomas Drive
Jackson, TN 38301 .............................................731-423-5725
Toll Free............................................................1-800-372-3928
Middle Tennessee – Region II
Ellington Agricultural Center
P.O. Box 41489
Nashville, TN 37204 ..........................................615-781-6622
Toll Free............................................................1-800-624-7406
Cumberland Plateau – Region III
464 Industrial Blvd
Crossville, TN 38555 .........................................931-484-9571
Toll Free............................................................1-833-402-4698
East Tennessee – Region IV
3030 Wildlife Way
Morristown, TN 37814 .....................................423-587-7037
Toll Free............................................................1-800-332-0900
74

-- 78 of 80 --

YOU MAY BE MOVING MORE
THAN YOUR BOAT!
YOU CAN HELP STOP THE SPREAD
OF AQUATIC HITCHHIKERS!
Remove all visible
plants, animals, fish,
and mud from your
boat, trailer, and
other equipment.
Drain water from
bilge, live wells,
and other areas
that may collect
water.
Dry your boat, trailer,
and all equipment
completely. Drying
times vary depending
on weather conditions
(minimum of 5 days).
 INSPECT 	 DRAIN 	 DRY
PROTECT TENNESSEE WATERS!
WWW.TNWILDLIFE.ORG

-- 79 of 80 --



-- 80 of 80 --

